Quelle: 2503.09905v1.pdf
Gesamtseiten: 6
================================================================================


--- Seite 1 ---
arXiv:2503.09905v1  [cs.SD]  12 Mar 2025Quantization for OpenAI’s Whisper Models: A
Comparative Analysis
1stAllison Andreyev
Independent Researcher
Washington DC, United States
allisonmandreyev@gmail.com
Abstract —Automated speech recognition (ASR) models have
gained prominence for applications such as captioning, spe ech
translation, and live transcription. This paper studies Wh isper
and two model variants: one optimized for live speech stream ing
and another for ofﬂine transcription. Notably, these model s
have been found to generate hallucinated content, reducing
transcription reliability. Furthermore, larger model var iants
exhibit increased latency and pose challenges for deployme nt on
resource-constrained devices. This study analyzes the sim ilarities
and differences between three Whisper models, qualitative ly
examining their distinct capabilities. Next, this study qu antiﬁes
the impact of model quantization on latency and evaluates it s
viability for edge deployment. Using the open source LibriS peech
dataset, this paper evaluates the word error rate (WER) alon g
with latency analysis of whispercpp using 3 quantization me thods
(INT4, INT5, INT8). Results show that quantization reduces
latency by 19% and model size by 45%, while preserving
transcription accuracy. These ﬁndings provide insights in to the
optimal use cases of different Whisper models and edge devic e
deployment possibilities. All code, datasets, and impleme ntation
details are available in Appendix Sec. A.
Index Terms —Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Large Language Models,
Quantization, Automatic Speech Recognition
I. I NTRODUCTION
The rise of large language models (LLMs) has enabled
advancements across multiple communication modalities, i n-
cluding speech processing. Whisper is an automated speech
recognition (ASR) system developed by OpenAI, designed for
applications such as speech transcription, live translati on, and
captioning [18]. The model has been trained with 680,000
hours of audio data, far surpassing the magnitude of trainin g
data used for ASR models. Furthermore, as training data has
been divvied into 97 total languages, Whisper is compatible
to act as a translation machine, frequently found to perform
better than LLM-based ASR models [20]. This robust ap-
proach has made Whisper one of the leading ASR models in
both research and practical applications, and allows Whisper
to be amongst the top performers across many applications of
speech processing, such as through translation, transcrip tion,
speech recognition, and zero-shot evaluation [17]. Additi on-
ally, due to Whisper ’s open support for quantization e.g
whispercpp –a lightweight model with built in quantization
features–, it led me to use Whisper as the focus of this
study [2]. Currently, Whisper contains ﬁve versions: tiny,
small, base, medium, and large. Due to its accuracy and easy
of use,Whisper is becoming increasingly popular in bothresearch and commercial applications [12]. However, these
models are not always accurate when transcribing speech, an d
some transcriptions have been found to contain hallucinati ons.
Moreover, larger model variants exhibit increased latency
and computational demands, making deployment on resource-
constrained devices more challenging. [10] ﬁnd that roughl y
1% of audio transcriptions by Whisper contained entire
hallucinated phrases or sentences, while also ﬁnding 38% of
hallucinations included harms such as violence, inaccurac ies or
false authority. While prior research has explored ﬁne-tun ing
strategies to enhance Whisper ’s performance [6], [8], [11],
[12], [14], [19], [21], the impact of quantization on model s ize
reduction and latency optimization remains underexplored .
A. Contributions and Organization
This paper addresses this research gap with a few contribu-
tions:
•Evaluating the capabilities of Whisper and 2 variants:
Whisper_Streaming &whisper-timestamped ,
with an emphasis on their similarities and differences.
•Establishing and deﬁning quantization techniques and
relevant hardware considerations applicable to Whisper
models.
•A qualitative review on usage between the Whisper and
Whisper_Streaming &whisper-timestamped
•Examining model performance in terms of word error
rate, processing speed, and latency, relative to model size ,
version, runtime, and quantization approach.
•Summarizing both qualitative and quantitative results
from two experimental evaluations.
I describe current research results and limitations in Sec. II.
Sec. III qualitatively compares Whisper and its two variant s. In
Sec. IV, I conduct a model performance experiment, followed
by a discussion of qualitative results in Sec. V. Sec. VI
compares the Whisper base model size with its performance on
the LibriSpeech audio dataset. Sec. VII introduces quantiz ation
and its applications for Whisper, while Sec. VIII compares t he
performance of whispercpp based on run type and quantizatio n
method. Sec. IX evaluates the impact of three quantization
methods on whispercpp’s accuracy, latency, and model size.
Finally, Sec. X discusses the practical applications of thi s
research, with a conclusion in Sec. XI.
--- Seite 2 ---
B. Note on Naming Conventions
In this work, I explore several variants of the Whisper
model . The naming conventions across these variants, devel-
oped by external organizations or individuals, are inconsi stent,
with some adopting different conventions:
•Whisper : Standard model developed by OpenAI
•whispercpp : C++ implementation of the Whisper model
•whisper-timestamped : Version with added timestamping
functionality
•Whisper Streaming : Version adapted for streaming
For consistency in this document, I will refer to these
variants using the most common or descriptive form of the
name. Please note that the developers may use different
naming conventions across various implementations.
II. L ITERATURE REVIEW
So far, several studies have been conducted on quantiz-
ing LLMs and ASR speech transcription. [17] evaluate the
Whisper model, describing it as an encoder-decoder trans-
former model, in which a decoder predicts a corresponding
text caption for each audio segment. They also note that
Whisper was trained on a large and diverse dataset, which
explains why its performance on a speciﬁc dataset may not
be as high as a model trained on only one kind [17]. [20]
evaluateWhisper model capabilities, and contrast it with
LLM-based ASR models. [20] explain how LLM-based ASR
models use a speech encoder to process speech and generate
embeddings which are passed into a decoder-only LLM. In
their experimentation, they ﬁnd that the performance of LLM -
based ASR models correlates positively with the proﬁciency
of the LLM in the language being recognized, posing a lim-
itation for LLM based ASR models. Additionally, [1] studies
Whisper hallucinations in audio transcriptions, noting that
Whisper has a tendency to generate and produce incorrect
repetitions of recognized text. Hallucinations refer to th e
generation of transcriptions that include fabricated or in correct
information that was not part of the original speech. Their
experiment ﬁnds several offensive hallucinations produce d in
data transcription and notes that audio length signiﬁcantl y
affects the error rate and audio content had minimal relatio n
on hallucination. [1]. Hallucinations pose a challenge for
Whisper , however this is a issue that could be addressed with
model quantization [22], a method which has been previously
found to decrease the WER, improving model accuracy [22].
[3] evaluate current quantization strategies, noting that moving
from FP to INT quantization holds potential to reduce latenc y
and memory footprint by a factor of 16x. Several studies had
conducted experiments quantizing ASR models. For example,
[23] evaluates quantization methods effects on model laten cy,
ﬁnding that quantization creates faster model inference an d
allows for model deployment on portable devices, on which
a stable network connection could be limited. However, the
study mainly evaluates INT8 quantization, which is only
one kind of integer quantization and may not speak for all
methods such as INT4 or INT5, respectively. Meanwhile,[9] discusses quantizing ASR models: they ﬁnd that neural
network architectures such as Whisper perform poorly on
edge hardware due to computation requirements, and note
that prior research on quantizing ASR models is limited.
Notably, QAT requiring training and validation data during
quantization may not always be available due to privacy or
security issues, forming a limitation for quantization mod els
which require QAT. [22] evaluate quantization methods on
Whisper accuracy and model size, relying on the P4Q
quantization strategy, which utilizes block-wise N4 quant i-
zation applied to the model’s primary weights. The study
evaluates their methods on 4 quantized Whisper models,
demonstrating improvement in latency and accuracy, with a
15.1% WER reduction for quantized Whisper . However,
similar to [23], this study doesn’t evaluate more than 1
type of quantization, which limits the experiment in terms
of deducing a pattern or relationship between quantization
methods and model performance. Additionally, [23] propose s
a general quantizer which uses a quantization scheme with
ﬂoating point (FP) and backward-pass quantization aware
training (BP-QAT). To evaluate this model, they use Whisper
and the LibriSpeech dataset and benchmark accuracy using
a standard WER, ﬁnding it improves by up to 5.7% with
their quantization methods. This method, however, is only
evaluated on one model and version of Whisper , so its
accuracy and results are not conﬁrmed for other sizes. Re-
search on quantization has found it could bear beneﬁts to
model accuracy, latency, and deployment opportunities [3] ,
[9], [22], [23]. Quantizing the model could beneﬁt users who
don’t have stable internet access, or need to use the model
on a mobile device. The translation and transcription featu res
of the model pose as key resources needed by the hard of
hearing community along with language barriers. However,
current research is limited in terms of quantization strate gies
applied, and latency categories studied. Furthermore, up u ntil
now, few studies have compared Whisper and its variants
-whisper-timestamped andWhisper_Streaming –
and the implications of each model individually. By an-
alyzingWhisper ’s variants, greater insights can be ana-
lyzed about the model backend and differentiating factors.
For example, Whisper_Streaming uses self-adaptive la-
tency [15], possibly affecting how latency is impacted by
quantization. Meanwhile, whisper-timestamped uses
a Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) approach (unique to
whisper-timestamped ) which allows for improved
timestamp accuracy, while also featuring conﬁdence scores
for each word. Furthermore, whisper-timestamped is
able to process longer ﬁles with little additional memory
usage compared to the Whisper Base model [4], [13]. This
difference in memory handing and individual word conﬁdence
scores pose interesting new research directions about this
model. In all, the Whisper model comparisons can clearly
conclude on variant applications and limitations, which pl ay a
key role in further research and development.
This paper aims to address these limitations by providing
a comprehensive evaluation of the 3 Whisper variations
--- Seite 3 ---
while running a quantization experiment using 3 methods of
integer quantization with a comprehensive model accuracy
and latency analysis.
III. M ODEL COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS
A. Whisper
Whisper, developed by OpenAI, is an ASR model capable of
speech transcription, translation, and language identiﬁc ation.
When transcribing, the model detects voice activity and att en-
uates background noise or music. When setting up Whisper ,
its dependencies PyTorch & ffmpeg command line tool must
also be installed. OpenAI has recently made an API version
that can be imported into any Python ﬁle as a module for
personal modiﬁcation. However, it is noted Whisper is not
designed for real-time transcription, and is only made to
process audio with at least 1 full sentence, which is prefera bly
less than 30 seconds in length.
B. Whisper Timestamped
whisper-timestamped is a version of Whisper that
creates word timestamps and more exact estimations on
speech segments using a Dynamic Time Warping approach
[13]. That way, start and end time estimations for speech
are more accurate and each word is processed individ-
ually, receiving its own conﬁdence score. By employing
this approach, whisper-timestamped can process longer
ﬁles with minimal additional memory overhead. OpenAI of-
fers a 9GB docker ﬁle and light installation of CPU, and
whisper-timestamped can also be used as a Python
module.whisper-timestamped has several output for-
mats:
•Outputs data in JSON format with: detailed timestamp
data, language detection, conﬁdence score
•CSV , SRT, VTT, TSV ﬁle
•Into speciﬁed output directory, ’verbose’ mode
Additionally, computation and conﬁdence scores can be
enabled and disabled for each word, and the user can choose
whether punctuation should be committed [5], [15], [17].
C. Whisper Streaming
Whisper_Streaming is an optimized variant of
Whisper designed for real-time speech transcription and
translation. Typically, Whisper_Streaming can transcribe
live speech with a 3.3 second latency. On top of dependencies
required for Whisper ,Whisper_Streaming requires the
Libra Sound File, a sound processing library, and requires
installing the Whisper back end and the OpenAI API.
Whisper_Streaming comes with 4 simulation modes:
•Start at: Starts processing audio at a time provided by
user.
•Ofﬂine : Processes the full audio ﬁle once in ofﬂine mode,
and then ﬁnds the lowest word error ratio.
•Comp unaware : Timer that measures processes/events;
does not count compute time, meant to lower latency
bounds and get ’true’ latency.•Default usage
Next, there were a few key similarities and differences
betweenWhisper_Streaming and the other 2 models.
Text and debug variables are outputted as soon as that piece
of the speech is processed, doing the transcription live rat her
than outputting ﬁnal data at the end. The model takes a sig-
niﬁcantly longer time to process longer audio; however, sim -
ilar towhisper-timestamped ,Whisper_Streaming
offers several customization features in Python ﬁles and th e
command line, such as an ofﬂine mode, customizing buffer
timing, when streaming starts, the language used, model,
and minimum segment size (what size the buffer transcribes
at a time). Longer audio ﬁles need to be split into small
pieces and then merged. In low latency streaming mode,
words can be split in the middle. Unlike the other models,
Whisper_Streaming does not do sentence segmentation:
it instead makes word-level timestamps. The model processe s
the new audio segment twice before ﬁnalizing, updates the
buffer to the timestamp with conﬁrmed audio segment. Lim-
its processing buffer window & reprocesses the conﬁrmed
sentence time stamps before moving on to the next speech
piece, this is because the objective is to limit buffer size
and increase efﬁciency for longer audio segments, while sti ll
ensuring accuracy.
1) Limitations: Due to lots of terminal output, it was
difﬁcult to see the full text transcript. Noted, this is miti gated
however, by the model storing the transcript in a separate tx t
ﬁle. Based on this output, Whisper_Streaming is not
ideal for pre-recorded audios due to its buffering method an d
accumulation of text data, making the terminal harder to sor t.
Additionally, for increased accuracy, each audio segment h as
one word processed at a time, which can cause lag in the
software.
All can be used as a Python module using its API.
IV. M ODEL PERFORMANCE EXPERIMENT
To evaluate the accuracy and latency of the base Whisper
models, this study utilizes 25 audio ﬁles from the LibriSpee ch
dataset, comprising both clean and challenging speech samp les
[16]. All models were executed in a standardized virtual
environment using Jupyter Notebook on an HP Envy CPU to
ensure consistency. From this experiment, qualitative res ults
were derived on the performance of all 3 models relative to
each other.
V. Q UALITATIVE RESULTS
A. Whisper Timestamped
whisper-timestamped provided additional personal-
ization compared to Whisper , such as specifying a ﬁle
output directory. A function in the Python module of
whisper-timestamped also takes several parameters that
allow for further customization on the way the speech is
transcribed. This model breaks off speech into segments, an d
then segments into words, sharing timestamps and conﬁdence
--- Seite 4 ---
scores for each individually. While Whisper provided times-
tamps for each sentence, whisper-timestamped provided
a timestamp for each word and conﬁdence score for each
sentence, phrase, and word, separately. Conﬁdence is rated
on a scale from 0.00 to 1.0. Notably, the conﬁdence score
and processing speed stayed the same for the longer and more
complicated pieces of text. whisper-timestamped also
has a few unique traits:
•Features a progress bar at the top of the output, with FPS
and percentage processed.
•Output by default is in JSON format.
•Specifying a language when translating would remove the
output featuring language probability.
Between model sizes, the largest model processes text at
about 400 FPS and the smallest model processes almost 2000
FPS. Conﬁdence levels increased dramatically for each word
between the tiny and large models. On average, the base model
took about 10 seconds to transcribe speech. All models did no t
interpret intonation to structure sentences and capitaliz ation
properly.
B. Whisper
UsingWhisper without the timestamped feature provided
me with some timestamps with text that were particularly lon g.
These timestamps were typically a range of a few seconds (for
each sentence). By default, the model provided 5 output ﬁles :
JSON, vtt, srt, txt, tsv All models would use commas, punc-
tuation, and capitalization correctly, they were able to ap ply
grammatical rules to a sentence, which differentiated it fr om
other speech transcription models. For example, a sentence
such as “Bob’s dogs were happily playing with Cat” would’ve
translated properly with Whisper [capitalizing ‘C’ in ‘cat’
to make a name], but may have translated to “Bobs dogs were
happily playing with cat” on non-AI powered transcription
devices. The time it took for the models to compute the lan-
guage and text was the same for the more complex speech as
the more clean speech. (About 10 seconds for the base model)
Unlikewhisper-timestamped ,Whisper did not output:
conﬁdence scores, timestamps for each word, and language
probability. For both models, performance on the test and
development set performance was similar. Throughout usage ,
there were some notable semantics utilized by the model,
such as intonation to determine capitalization and sentenc e
structure. The model goes through 2 layers of transcription ,
and it adjusts transcription as it goes, predictions of text may
change in a buffer as they’re being double-checked or the nex t
part is being listened to.
VI. M ODEL SIZE VS . PERFORMANCE EXPERIMENT
Using 10 distinct recordings from the ‘test-clear’ and
‘test-other’ data sets from Librispeech, each audio seg-
ment was manually timestamped and compared with
the timestamps provided by Whisper_Streaming and
whisper-timestamped ’s base versions. Timestamps went
up to the centiseconds (cs).A. Whisper Streaming
Whisper_Streaming demonstrated strong accuracy,
with automatically generated timestamps deviating no more
than 0.5 seconds from manually recorded ones. However, the
software would frequently start each timestamp from 0.00s,
even though the words started being spoken at a later point in
the audio recording. Additionally, it was a frequent patter n to
notice the software undercount seconds needed to pronounce a
phrase, being about 0.2s ahead of human-recorded timestamp s
most of the time.
B. Whisper Timestamped
whisper-timestamped had more distinct times-
tamps, with each word getting its separate time frame.
It seemed to have the same level of accuracy as
Whisper_Streaming when it came to comparing the
generated timestamps to human-recorded ones. The beneﬁt
ofwhisper-timestamped overWhisper_Streaming
was the increased precision of the timestamps and more detai l.
whisper-timestamped also started off with more accu-
rate timestamps than Whisper_Streaming , which usually
started each segment at 0.00s.
C. Observations
The following table displays qualiative usage observation s
withWhisper based on model size.
TABLE I
QUALITATIVE WHISPER USAGE EXPERIENCE ON LIBRISPEECH DATASETS
BASED ON MODEL SIZE AND SPEECH DIFFICULTY
Model Size Clean Speech Challenging Speech
Tiny Quick output (¡ 10s), low
GPU/CPU usage, inaccu-
racies with larger text or
names, capitalization is-
suesMisses small background
noises, e.g., “They wor-
shiped” only “worship”
heard
Small 10-20s output, best capi-
talization, good timestamp
detailsSimilar to Medium, but 2x
faster
Medium 20-40s output, similar ac-
curacy to large modelN/A
Large Long download (2GB),
slow processing (up to a
couple of minutes), punc-
tuation and capitalization
issuesModiﬁes structure to be
grammatically correct
while matching audio
more closely
D. Results
Whisper_Streaming demonstrated strong accuracy,
with automatically generated timestamps deviating no more
than 0.5 seconds from manually recorded ones. The algorithm
for both models was programmed to detect and check for trail-
ing sounds like ‘s’ or ‘n’ correctly and performed well again st
human-labeled timestamps. whisper-timestamped prior-
itized precision and granularity, albeit at the cost of incr eased
processing time compared to other models.
--- Seite 5 ---
VII. Q UANTIZATION WITH WHISPER
Quantization involves converting a neural network (NN)
or large language model (LLM) to a lower-precision format,
reducing memory requirements for deployment on resource-
limited devices. Quantization maps continuous input value s
to discrete levels at the output. Whisper , being an audio
LLM, has the ability to be quantized to be deployed and
used on smaller devices with less computing power. Thus, the
following experiment evaluates whether model accuracy and
latency are affected positively through quantization tech niques.
A. Hardware Support for Quantization
The deployment of quantized models beneﬁts from hard-
ware accelerators that optimize the efﬁciency of quantizat ion
tasks. Key hardware platforms include:
•AMD and ARM CPUs: Support for mixed-precision
operations and 8-bit integer quantization, with notable
examples including AMD Zen 4 and ARM Neoverse
V1/V2 architectures.
•Apple Silicon and NVIDIA GPUs: Apple’s chips (A17
Pro, M4) and NVIDIA’s H100 GPU offer enhanced
support for 8-bit integer quantization and tensor core
optimization.
•Intel CPUs and Qualcomm GPUs: Intel Xeon pro-
cessors feature support for 8-bit integer quantization via
AMX, while Qualcomm Adreno GPUs provide optimiza-
tion for mixed-precision tasks.
VIII. Q UANTIZED WHISPER CPU VS. GPU
PERFORMANCE
Using several quantization methods (Q4, Q5, and Q8), the
baseWhisper model was quantized to compare different
implementation methods, experiences, accuracy, and obser ved
differences.
The following table describes the difference in total run
time, divided into several components based on quantizatio n
and runtime type (CPU versus GPU).
TABLE II
WHISPER BASELINE VS . QUANTIZED COMPUTE TIMES BASED ON
HARDWARE
Timewhispercpp (GPU) whispercpp (CPU)
Standard Quantized Standard Quantized
Load 123.58 ms 66.54 ms 162.27 ms 94.51 ms
Mel 43.29 ms 51.26 ms 80.58 ms 80.88 ms
Sample 2.03 ms/run 1.47 ms/run 1.84 ms/run 1.87 ms/run
Encode 4604.79
ms/run5934.99
ms/run6468.15
ms/run8612.49
ms/run
Decode 226.40
ms/run9.75 ms/run 12.56
ms/run11.16
ms/run
Batchd 9.94 ms/run 7.76 ms/run 7.94 ms/run 9.10 ms/run
Prompt 0.00 ms/run 0.00 ms/run 0.00 ms/run 0.00 ms/run
Total 6786.58 ms 7414.24 ms 8033.38 ms 10380.28
msIX. Q UANTIZATION FOR OPTIMIZATION EXPERIMENT
Next, the experiment evaluates how accuracy and latency
are affected by the quantization of the Whisper models.
Reference the Appendix B for hardware speciﬁcations.
For my audio data, I used the open source Librispeech ASR
[16] dataset, using the ﬁrst 10 audio ﬁles provided. These
audio transcriptions then determine how quantization meth ods
(Q4, Q5, Q8) affect model speed and accuracy. This study
evaluates the WER and accuracy using [7], a model which
uses components of huggingface-evaluate and openai-whisp er
projects for WER calculation. The following table records k ey
observations:
TABLE III
WER, M ODEL SIZE,AND LATENCY BASED ON QUANTIZATION METHOD
Metric Whisper CPP Base Model INT5 INT4 INT8
Word Error Rate 0.0199 0.0199 0.0159 0.0199
Accuracy 98.0% 98.0% 98.4% 98.0%
Model Size 141.11MB 52.75MB 44.33MB 77.99MB
Avg Latency 10.64s 11.11s 10.55s 9.02s
X. A PPLICATIONS
The results of this study could have profound implications
for resource-constrained environments, such as mobile dev ices,
IoT, and embedded systems. By reducing the memory footprint
and maintaining high accuracy, quantized Whisper models
could provide real-time transcription services, enable lo w-
latency captioning, and improve accessibility for users wi th
hearing impairments. The deployment of the Whisper models
onto portable devices sets a high benchmark for transcripti on,
translation, and speech detection services available for c om-
mercial use.
XI. C ONCLUSION
The study concludes that quantization is a viable method
for reducing model size and improving deployment efﬁciency
without sacriﬁcing accuracy or latency. This experiment re -
duces model size by up to 45% while maintaining the same
WER and decreasing latency by 19%. These results support
the feasibility of Whisper on smaller devices, suggesting that
Whisper can be effectively deployed on resource-limited de-
vices such as smartphones and IoT systems, making real-time
ASR more accessible and efﬁcient. Extending this research
to other ASR models could enhance the scalability of audio-
based AI applications. Future work could explore additiona l
quantization techniques, optimize hardware deployment st rate-
gies, and investigate trade-offs in real-time performance . As
ASR models scale, optimizing the trade-off between accurac y,
efﬁciency, and real-time performance will be critical for n ext-
generation AI deployment.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Bara´ nski, J. Jasi´ nski, J. Bartolewska, S. Kacprzak , M. Witkowski,
and K. Kowalczyk. Investigation of whisper asr hallucinati ons induced
by non-speech audio, 2025.
[2] G. Gerganov. ggerganov/whisper.cpp: Port of openai’s w hisper model
in c/c++.
--- Seite 6 ---
[3] A. Gholami, S. Kim, Z. Dong, Z. Yao, M. W. Mahoney, and K. Ke utzer.
A survey of quantization methods for efﬁcient neural networ k inference,
2021.
[4] T. Giorgino. Computing and visualizing dynamic time war ping align-
ments in r: The dtw package. Journal of Statistical Software , 31(7),
2009. doi: 10.18637/jss.v031.i07
[5] T. Giorgino. Computing and visualizing dynamic time war ping align-
ments inr: ThedtwPackage. J. Stat. Softw. , 31(7), 2009.
[6] C. Graham and N. Roll. Evaluating openai’s whisper asr: P erformance
analysis across diverse accents and speaker traits. JASA Express Letters ,
4(2):025206, 02 2024. doi: 10.1121/10.0024876
[7] ins8ai. Ins8ai/wer: Word error rate computation using c omponents from
huggingface-evaluate and openai-whisper projects, Oct 20 23.
[8] J. Johansson. Automatic Word Decoding Assessment Using Whisper
and Machine Learning Techniques: An Automatic Speech Recog nition
Method to Assess the Early Reading Abilities of Young Childr en Reading
Swedish . Dissertation, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, 2024.
[9] S. Kim, A. Gholami, Z. Yao, N. Lee, P. Wang, A. Nrusimha, B. Zhai,
T. Gao, M. W. Mahoney, and K. Keutzer. Integer-only zero-sho t
quantization for efﬁcient speech recognition. In ICASSP 2022 - 2022
IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Sig nal Pro-
cessing (ICASSP) , pp. 4288–4292, 2022. doi: 10.1109/ICASSP43922.
2022.9747552
[10] A. Koenecke, A. S. G. Choi, K. X. Mei, H. Schellmann, and M . Sloane.
Careless whisper: Speech-to-text hallucination harms. In Proceed-
ings of the 2024 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability , and
Transparency , FAccT ’24, p. 1672–1681. Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY , USA, 2024. doi: 10.1145/3630106.3 658996
[11] Y . Liu and D. Qu. Parameter-efﬁcient ﬁne-tuning of whis per for low-
resource speech recognition. In 2024 5th International Seminar on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Networking and Information Techn ology (AINIT) ,
pp. 1522–1525, 2024. doi: 10.1109/AINIT61980.2024.10581 773
[12] Y . Liu, X. Yang, and D. Qu. Exploration of whisper ﬁne-tu ning strategies
for low-resource asr. Journal of Audio, Speech, and Music Processing ,
2024:29, 2024. doi: 10.1186/s13636-024-00349-3
[13] J. Louradour. whisper-timestamped.
https://github.com/linto-ai/whisper-timestamped, 202 3.
[14] H. Ma, Z. Peng, M. Shao, J. Li, and J. Liu. Extending whisp er with
prompt tuning to target-speaker asr. In ICASSP 2024 - 2024 IEEE
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal P rocessing
(ICASSP) , pp. 12516–12520, 2024. doi: 10.1109/ICASSP48485.2024.
10447492
[15] D. Mach´ aˇ cek, R. Dabre, and O. Bojar. Turning whisper i nto real-time
transcription system. In S. Saha and H. Sujaini, eds., Proceedings of
the 13th International Joint Conference on Natural Languag e Processing
and the 3rd Conference of the Asia-Paciﬁc Chapter of the Asso ciation
for Computational Linguistics: System Demonstrations , pp. 17–24. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, Bali, Indonesia , Nov. 2023. doi:
10.18653/v1/2023.ijcnlp-demo.3
[16] V . Panayotov, G. Chen, D. Povey, and S. Khudanpur. Libri speech: an
asr corpus based on public domain audio books. In Acoustics, Speech
and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2015 IEEE International Co nference
on, pp. 5206–5210. IEEE, 2015.
[17] A. Radford, J. W. Kim, T. Xu, G. Brockman, C. McLeavey, an d
I. Sutskever. Robust speech recognition via large-scale we ak supervision.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.04356 , 2022.
[18] N. Rao, S. O’Riordan, and J. Coulis. Ai and labor: Cap-
tioning library audiovisual content with whisper. IFLA Journal ,
0(0):03400352241310534, 2025. doi: 10.1177/03400352241 310534
[19] S. Rijal, S. Adhikari, M. Dahal, M. Awale, and V . Ojha. Wh isper
ﬁnetuning on nepali language, 2024.
[20] Z. Song, Z. Ma, Y . Yang, J. Zhuo, and X. Chen. A comparativ e study of
llm-based asr and whisper in low resource and code switching scenario,
2024.
[21] V . Timmel, C. Paonessa, R. Kakooee, M. V ogel, and D. Perr uchoud.
Fine-tuning whisper on low-resource languages for real-wo rld applica-
tions, 2024.
[22] Q. Zhao, G. Sun, C. Zhang, M. Xu, and T. F. Zheng. Speaker a daptation
for quantised end-to-end asr models, 2024.
[23] K. Zhen, M. Radfar, H. D. Nguyen, G. P. Strimel, N. Susanj , and
A. Mouchtaris. Sub-8-bit quantization for on-device speec h recognition:
a regularization-free approach, 2022.APPENDIX
A.
https://github.com/allisonandreyev/WhisperQuantizat ion
B.
Cpuinfo Version: 9.0.0
Brand Raw: Intel(R) Xeon(R) CPU @ 2.20GHz
Hz Advertised Friendly: 2.2000 GHz
Hz Actual Friendly: 2.2000 GHz
Hz Advertised: (2200000000, 0)
Hz Actual: (2199998000, 0)
Arch: X86 64
Bits: 64
Count: 2
Arch String Raw: x86 64
L1 Data Cache Size: 32768
L1 Instruction Cache Size: 32768
L2 Cache Size: 262144
L2 Cache Line Size: 256
L2 Cache Associativity: 6
L3 Cache Size: 57671680