Quelle: Application_of_Virtualization_and_Containerization_Technologies_in_IP_Telephony.pdf
Gesamtseiten: 5
================================================================================


--- Seite 1 ---
Application of Virtualization and Containerization 
Technologies in IP Telephony 
 
V. M. Antonova 
Moscow Technical University of Communications and 
Informatics 
Moscow, Russia 
V.A. Kotelnikov Institute of Radio Engineering and 
Electronics of the Russian Academy of Sciences 
Moscow, Russia 
v.m.antonova@mtuci.ru 
A. Y. Malikov 
Moscow Technical University of Communications and 
Informatics 
Moscow, Russia E. E. Malikova 
Moscow Technical University of Communications and 
Informatics 
Moscow, Russia 
e.e.malikova@mtuci.ru 
 
M. A. Fartyshev 
Moscow Technical University of Communications and 
Informatics 
Moscow, Russia 
 
 
Abstract — The article considers the contemporary trends that  
telecommunication companies are facing in the rapid ly changing 
technological environment. One of the trends is the  technology of 
network virtualization, which allows to significant ly increase the 
efficiency of network resources through the organiz ation of 
multiple virtual resources based on one physical re source. The 
objective of this study is to analyze new tools ava ilable for the 
implementation of a virtual IP PBX. Virtualization and 
containerization technologies that affect the effic ient operation of 
VoIP services are studied in the paper. The impleme ntation of 
these technologies has been shown to facilitate mor e efficient use 
of server resources and more secure interaction wit h multiple 
tools for analyzing system operation. The principle s of 
integrating software telephone exchanges into the v irtualized 
environment are considered. Special attention is pa id to the 
integration of a virtual Asterisk exchange into the  containerized 
environment. Approaches to automating Asterisk’s de ployment 
and management in the microservice architecture usi ng a 
Kubernetes platform are also considered. It is reco mmended that 
virtualization and containerization technologies sh ould be 
incorporated into the curricula of technical univer sities.) 
Keywords—virtualization; container; container orches tration; 
IP telephony; VoIP; Kubernetes Cluster; K8s; Asteri sk;Kamailio 
I.   INTRODUCTION  
Voice transmission through packet switched networks  over 
the Internet Protocol (VoIP – Voice over IP) is cur rently a 
widespread technology across telecommunication netw orks  
[1, 2]. Readily available solutions based on the eq uipment of 
prominent companies such as Cisco, Avaya, Iskratel and others 
can be used for IP telephony. IP PBXs built on soft ware 
solutions are also widely accepted in contemporary networks. 
These IP PBXs play an important role in the network  infrastructure, offering flexibility, scalability a nd economic 
efficiency of the exchange. 
IP PBXs such as Asterisk, Freeswitch and Kamailio a re 
built on the basis of open software systems. Asteri sk, an open-
source software PBX [3, 4] is a highly popular solu tion in the 
field of IP telephony. It is a very flexible platfo rm that is 
employed to organize communications in various offi ces and 
large industrial enterprises. The PBX's functionali ty makes it 
possible to realize almost every function, for exam ple, video 
conferencing, voice recognition function, creation of 
interactive voice menu (IVR or Interactive Voice Re sponse) 
and others [5]. 
Network Functions Virtualization (NFV) is a technol ogy 
that has had a profound impact on the topologies of  
telecommunication networks [6, 7]. It enables the a bstraction 
from physical hardware and the creation of multiple  isolated 
virtual environments on a single physical server, t hereby 
providing more efficient use of network resources a nd 
simplifying infrastructure management. For instance , 10-20 
virtual machines can be run on a single physical se rver. 
The evolution of cloud technologies and containeriz ation 
has resulted in an increased demand for the efficie nt 
deployment and management of the Asterisk software 
exchange in an environment that provides high fault  tolerance, 
automatic scaling and ease of use. Kubernetes platf orm (K8s) 
is a standard for container orchestration that prov ides all the 
necessary tools to build a flexible and fault-toler ant IP 
telephony infrastructure. It is necessary to take i nto account the 
interaction of PBX with the SIP signaling protocol and the RTP 
multimedia traffic transfer protocol [8]. 
979-8-3315-3263-5/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE 2025 Systems of Signals Generating and Processing in the Field of on Board Communications | 979-8-3315-3263-5/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/IEEECONF64229.2025.10948100
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hochschule für Technik Wirtschaft und Kultur. Downloaded on December 01,2025 at 14:43:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- Seite 2 ---
II.  VIRTUALIZATION AND CONTAINERIZATION 
TECHNOLOGIES  
Virtualization can be defined as the provision of a  set of 
computational resources or their logical combinatio n abstracted 
from the hardware implementation while providing lo gical 
isolation from each other for the computational pro cesses 
running on the same physical resource [9]. 
A virtual machine (VM) is an environment that is pr esented 
to the guest operating system as a hardware environ ment. VM 
is a very convenient tool for debugging software an d 
conducting experiments without disturbing the main OS, as 
well as for running several operating systems on on e computer 
concurrently [10]. A hypervisor is responsible for optimal 
resource allocation between VMs and for isolation o f operating 
systems. Virtualbox is an example of such a hypervi sor 
program. 
The following main types of virtualization can curr ently be 
distinguished: software and full (hardware) virtual ization, 
operating system (OS) level virtualization and appl ication 
virtualization. 
With hardware virtualization , the hypervisor can work 
directly with physical resources without a host sys tem (Fig. 1). 
The hypervisor allocates hardware to virtual machin es where 
operating systems are installed. This results in al most full-
fledged physical computers. At the same time, virtu al machines 
are completely isolated from each other. 
 
Fig. 1.  Full (hardware) virtualization 
When using software virtualization, the hypervisor operates 
in conjunction with physical resources via the host  operating 
system, which is installed on the computer or serve r (Fig. 2). 
Software virtualization is used by Oracle VM Virtua lBox and 
VMware Workstation. 
 
Fig. 2.  Software virtualization In the context of operating system level virtualiza tion, there 
is no separate hypervisor layer. Instead, the host operating 
system itself is responsible for the allocation of hardware 
resources to multiple virtual machines and for supp orting their 
isolation from each other (Fig. 3). These processes  are isolated 
within a separate container. The container, in turn , receives an 
almost full-fledged operating system where applicat ions can be 
installed. This type of virtualization has become v ery popular 
in recent times. 
 
Fig. 3.  Operating system level virtualization 
Application virtualization enables different applic ations to 
run independently of the host operating system. The  virtual 
environment in which a particular application runs separates it 
from physical resources and the host operating syst em. This 
type of virtualization is employed, for example, by  Docker [11, 
12]. 
III.  OVERVIEW OF TECHNOLOGIES FOR IMPLEMENTING A 
VIRTUAL PBX 
Containerization technologies have evolved, and thi s has 
led to an increased demand for efficient deployment  and 
management of IP-PBXs in an environment that provid es high 
fault tolerance, automatic scaling and ease of oper ation is 
increasing. The following discussion will consider in more 
detail the technologies required to deploy Asterisk  in the 
Kubernetes environment. 
Kubernetes (K8s) is a platform for automating the 
deployment, scaling, and management of containerize d 
applications [13]. It is a container orchestration standard that 
provides all the necessary tools to build a flexibl e and fault-
tolerant IP telephony infrastructure. The platform allows for 
efficient management of system components, offering  load 
balancing within the cluster, and maintaining suffi cient system 
fault tolerance and automatic service recovery. All  settings are 
described declaratively using manifests in the YAML  or JSON 
format, which is a specific file format perceived b y K8s. 
The deployment of Asterisk within the Kubernetes 
environment necessitates the decomposition of a mon olithic 
application into discrete microservices, which allo ws achieving 
flexibility, scalability and manageability of the s ystem [14, 15]. 
The following components constitute the primary ele ments 
of the architecture: 
1. Asterisk Core, which is the principle service th at 
handles the management of voice calls, the routing of calls, 
and the processing of media streams. It functions w ithin a 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hochschule für Technik Wirtschaft und Kultur. Downloaded on December 01,2025 at 14:43:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- Seite 3 ---
container and necessitates a flexible configuration  for 
interaction with external systems. 
2. SIP Proxy (Kamailio), which performs the functio ns of 
routing and balancing SIP messages prior to their t ransmission 
to Asterisk, thereby reducing the main workload and  
increasing fault tolerance. 
3. Database (PostgreSQL, MySQL), which is used to s tore 
configuration, CDR (Call Detail Record) data and us er 
authorization data. PostgreSQL provides reliable da ta storage 
and processing, and is easily integrated with Aster isk and 
other services. 
4. Configuration and management (ConfigMaps, Secret s). 
Kubernetes provides tools for centralized managemen t of 
configurations and secret data (logins, passwords, encryption 
keys). 
5. Load balancer (Ingress Controller, Load Balancer ), 
which provides traffic distribution between service  replicas 
and ensures an entry point into the cluster. 
6. Monitoring and Logging (Prometheus, Grafana), wh ich are 
used to track metrics, performance and to analyze A sterisk logs. 
Asterisk deployment in the Kubernetes cluster can b e 
organized in several ways, each of which has its ow n features 
and areas of application. 
The monolithic deployment  involves running Asterisk in a 
single container, incorporating all the necessary u nits. This is 
the simplest option, suitable for testing or small systems. 
However, this approach makes it difficult to scale and update 
the application. 
The microservice approach  involves splitting Asterisk 
functions into several containers, including SIP pr oxy 
(Kamailio), database (PostgreSQL), RTP proxy (RTP P roxy), 
etc. This option offers flexibility, fault toleranc e and easy 
upgrades, though it requires more complex customiza tion. 
The hybrid approach combines elements of monolithic and 
microservice deployments, thereby enabling the sepa ration of 
critical components into discrete services, while l eaving the 
main functions in a single container. This represen ts a good 
compromise for a gradual migration. 
Practical Implementation of Asterisk IP-PBX in a 
Kubernetes Cluster 
In order to study virtualization technology, studen ts are 
offered to conduct laboratory experiments on the de ployment 
of an IP-PBX of the Asterisk type in a Kubernetes p latform. In 
this case, it is important to ensure the stable ope ration of the 
system when the load on VoIP services increases. As  illustrated 
in Fig. 4, the block diagram shows the interaction of the system 
components. This diagram illustrates the architectu re of the 
deployed services, including the traffic forwarding  scheme. 
Traffic arrives at the entry point of the Kubernete s cluster when 
accessing the virtual PBX. The following services a re launched 
as containers: Asterisk, Postgres, Kamailio, and RT PProxy. 
The Kubernetes platform is characterized by its own  
terminology: Running containers with certain characteristics and  
applications running in them are called pods ; 
Cluster nodes are both control and compute nodes;  
Master Node is  responsible for setting tasks accepted from 
the API server; 
Worker Node is responsible for executing the container on 
its computing resources. 
 
Fig. 4.  Block diagram of the system component interaction 
The initial step is to deploy a K8s cluster. One of  the 
minimum system configurations involves one Master n ode and 
one Worker node. We will use virtual machines with the 
following specifications: 
– Master Node with two virtual processors and 2 GB RAM; 
– Worker Node with four virtual processors and 8 GB  RAM. 
The selection of VM capacities is deliberate as the  
minimum parameters of a node in a K8s cluster are t wo CPUs 
(Central Processing Unit) and 2 GB RAM. For the Mas ter 
Node this is quite enough, since if there is at lea st one Worker 
Node, the containers are started on the Worker Node , while the 
Master Node is engaged in tracking the viability of  pods, 
restarting, etc. 
Subsequently, the K8s cluster must be initialized u sing the 
kubeadm tool, for this purpose the following comman d should 
be entered on the Master Node: 
kubeadm init --apiserver-advertise-address=192.168. 255.136  
The command will initialize the cluster with the AP I server 
address at 192.168.255.136. 
In addition, configuration files must be imported i nto the 
cluster. It is necessary to deploy a plugin to mana ge IP 
addressing of pods, as well as a command to add the  first 
Worker Node to the cluster with the generated token .  
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hochschule für Technik Wirtschaft und Kultur. Downloaded on December 01,2025 at 14:43:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- Seite 4 ---
Kubernetes tokens  are cryptographic credentials that are 
used to authenticate users and service accounts whe n 
interacting with the Kubernetes API server. 
The next step is to export the configuration file o f the 
created cluster, in order to interact with it. The subsequent step 
involves the addition of Worker Nodes to the cluste r. The 
exportation of the configuration file and the gener ation of a 
token for the Worker Node connection are illustrate d in Fig. 5. 
 
Fig. 5.  The result of the Worker Node connection 
In the subsequent phase, the deployment of Asterisk , 
Postgres, TRPProxy and Kamailio pods is to be under taken. 
The status of all pods in the cluster, including th ose with the 
pod IP addressing management plugin, Asterisk, RTPP roxy 
and Kamailio (Fig. 6). 
 
Fig. 6.  Information about running pods 
The next step is to initiate a test call in order t o make sure 
that the PBX is functioning correctly. 
 
Fig. 7.  Positive test call result In the course of the deployment of Asterisk PBX in the 
Kubernetes environment, the designated tasks were 
successfully accomplished. These included the devel opment of 
the system infrastructure, the automatic deployment  and 
configuration of services. A test call was made. Th e system 
demonstrated stable operation, thereby confirming t he 
feasibility of creating highly efficient and scalab le solutions for 
IP telephony in a containerized environment. 
IV.  PROSPECTS OF USING ASTERISK IN A KUBERNETES 
CLUSTER  
In the process of technology development and increa sing 
requirements for communication services, the Asteri sk PBX 
and Kubernetes platform have good prospects for joi nt use. At 
the same time it is important to ensure stable oper ation of the 
system when the load on VoIP services increases. Sc alability 
issues are solved by automatically creating additio nal pods 
from the Asterisk image. Kubernetes allows you to 
dynamically scale the system using the Horizontal P od 
Autoscaler system. This is a system for scaling the  resources 
available for containers; it monitors the load of C PU and RAM 
and creates additional pods if necessary. Kamailio in turn plays 
the role of a balancer, distributing the load of SI P traffic 
between Asterisk replicas. PostgreSQL database is a lso scaled 
by creating replica pods. 
The fault tolerance of the system is ensured by mec hanisms 
that automatically restart containers in case of fa ilure. 
Kubernetes also provides load balancing within the cluster, 
distributing it evenly across the cluster nodes. 
Modern approaches to automation, which are actively  used 
by DevOps engineers in development, make it possibl e to 
simplify infrastructure management by implementing 
automated processes that include building, testing and 
deploying software. Using unified K8s packages to r un 
standard applications in the container orchestratio n 
environment makes the network management process mo re 
convenient and predictable for operators. 
Currently, 30 virtual machines have been created on  the 
server for laboratory works. All of them are prepar ed to 
perform laboratory works.  Students deploy Asterisk  IP PBXs 
on these virtual machines. In the future, it is pla nned to expand 
the list of laboratory works with the help of addit ional settings 
of the Asterisk exchange in the containerized envir onment. 
V.  CONCLUSION  
The application of virtualization and containerizat ion 
technologies to IP telephony is a very timely prosp ect. The 
laboratory work described in the article provides g reat 
opportunities to study these technologies. 
Working with virtual machines and containers, stude nts not 
only get acquainted with promising virtual IP PBXs,  but also 
gain practical experience of working with such equi pment. 
Using the Kubernetes platform for Asterisk PBX 
management allows ensuring flexibility, fault toler ance and 
scalability of the system, which is an important re quirement for 
modern communication services. The possibilities of  process 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hochschule für Technik Wirtschaft und Kultur. Downloaded on December 01,2025 at 14:43:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- Seite 5 ---
automation, integration with cloud solutions and ne twork 
technologies open wide prospects for further develo pment and 
optimization of such services. This creates the bas is for 
developing and improving the infrastructure of IP t elephony 
systems using a virtual Asterisk PBX in the Kuberne tes 
platform. 
REFERENCES  
[1]  N.N. Vasin, “Packet switching technologies,” tutori al. PART 1. Routing 
and Switching. PGUTI Publ., 2021, 294 p. [in Russia n]  
[2]  V. Olifer, N. Olifer, “Computer Networks: Principle s, Technologies and 
Protocols for Network Design,” St. Petersgurg: Pite r, 2020, 1008 p. [in 
Russian]  
[3]  M.G. Kanischeva, Y.Y. Malikova, I.I. Pelevin and A. P. Pshenichnikov, 
“The basics of working with the virtual telephone A STERISK IP-PBX,” 
textbook. Moscow: Media Publisher, 2021, 100 p. [in  Russian] 
[4]  V.M. Antonova, E.E. Malikova, M.S. Stepanov, “Ways of the Asterisk 
software PBX protection,” T-Comm , vol. 17, no. 10, 2023, pp. 52-58. 
DOI: 10.36724/2072-8735-2023-17-10-52-58. [5]  J. Meggelen, L. Madsen, J. Smith, “AsteriskTM: The future of 
telephony,” 2nd ed. Translated from English, St. Pe tersburg: Symbol-
Plus, 2019, 656 p. [in Russian] 
[6]  A.V. Roslyakov, S.V. Vanyashin, “Future Networks,” Samara, PSUTI 
Publ., 2015, 274 p. [in Russian] 
[7]  R.L. Smelyanskiy, V.A. Antonenko, “SDN and NFV Prin ciples in 
Computer Networks,” Moscow, KURS, 2020, 160 p. [in Russian] 
[8]  B.S. Goldshtein, “Infocommunications networks and s ystems,” St. 
Petersburg, BHV-Petergurg, 2019, 208 p. [in Russian ] 
[9]  V.M. Antonova, V.P. Blinov, M.A. Egorov, A.Y. Malik ov, “Studying 
the Principles of Infocommunication Network Virtual isation Using the 
Docker Platform,” 2024 Systems of Signals Generating and Processing 
in the Field of on Board Communications , 2024, pp. 24-28. 
[10]   A.H. Sayers, I. Miell, “Docker in Practice, Mannin g,” 2019, 384 p. 
[11]   K8s. Official Site: Container Orchestration Softwa re. URL: 
https://kubernetes.io/ 
[12]   Asterisk. Official site: PBX Software. URL: https: //www.asterisk.org/  
[13]   S.A. Grushko, A.P. Pshenichnikov, E.E. Malikova an d A.Y. Malikov, 
“Virtual Asterisk IP-PBX Operation Studying and Exp loring at the 
University,” 2022 Systems of Signals Generating and Processing i n the 
Field of on Board Communications , Moscow, Russian Federation, 2022, 
pp. 15-20. 
 
 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hochschule für Technik Wirtschaft und Kultur. Downloaded on December 01,2025 at 14:43:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 