Academic Editor: Jamal
Jokar Arsanjani
Received: 17 September 2025
Revised: 11 November 2025
Accepted: 24 November 2025
Published: 4 December 2025
Citation: Guillen-Aguinaga, M.;
Aguinaga-Ontoso, E.;
Guillen-Aguinaga, L.; Guillen-Grima,
F.; Aguinaga-Ontoso, I. Data Quality
in the Age of AI: A Review of
Governance, Ethics, and the FAIR
Principles. Data 2025, 10, 201.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
data10120201
Copyright: © 2025 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license
(https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/).
Review
Data Quality in the Age of AI: A Review of Governance, Ethics,
and the FAIR Principles
Miriam Guillen-Aguinaga 1, Enrique Aguinaga-Ontoso 2,3
, Laura Guillen-Aguinaga 4,
Francisco Guillen-Grima 5,6,7,8,*
and Ines Aguinaga-Ontoso 6,7,8,*
1
School of Law, International University of La Rioja, 26006 Logroño, Spain; miriamguillenaguinaga@gmail.com
2
Department of Sociosanitary Sciences, University of Murcia, 30120 Murcia, Spain; aguinaga@um.es
3
Department of Preventive Medicine, Virgen de la Arrixaca University Clinical Hospital, 30120 Murcia, Spain
4
Department of Nursing, Clinica Universidad de Navarra, 28027 Madrid, Spain; lguillen@alumni.unav.es
5
Department of Preventive Medicine, Clinica Universidad de Navarra, 31008 Pamplona, Spain
6
Department of Health Sciences, Public University of Navarra, 31008 Pamplona, Spain
7
Group of Clinical Epidemiology, Area of Epidemiology and Public Health, Healthcare Research Institute of
Navarre (IdiSNA), 31008 Pamplona, Spain
8
CIBER in Epidemiology and Public Health (CIBERESP), Institute of Health Carlos III, 46980 Madrid, Spain
*
Correspondence: f.guillen.grima@unavarra.es (F.G.-G.); ines.aguinaga@unavarra.es (I.A.-O.)
Abstract
Data quality is fundamental to scientific integrity, reproducibility, and evidence-based
decision-making. Nevertheless, many datasets lack transparency in their collection and
curation, undermining trust and reusability across research domains. This narrative review
synthesizes scientific and technical literature published between 1996 and 2025, comple-
mented by international standards (ISO/IEC 25012, ISO 8000), to provide an integrated
overview of data quality frameworks, governance, and ethical considerations in the era of
Artificial Intelligence (AI). Sources were retrieved from PubMed, Scopus, Web of Science,
and grey literature. Across sectors, accuracy, completeness, consistency, timeliness, and ac-
cessibility consistently emerged as universal quality dimensions. Evidence from healthcare,
business, and public administration suggests that poor data quality leads to substantial
financial losses, operational inefficiencies, and erosion of trust. Emerging frameworks
are increasingly integrating FAIR principles (Findability, Accessibility, Interoperability,
Reusability) and incorporating ethical safeguards, including bias mitigation in AI systems.
Data quality is not solely a technical issue but a socio-organizational challenge that requires
robust governance and continuous assurance throughout the data lifecycle. Embedding
quality and ethical governance into data management practices is crucial for producing
trustworthy, reusable, and reproducible data that supports sound science and informed
decision-making.
Keywords: data quality; data governance; FAIR principles; ISO/IEC 25012; data lifecycle;
artificial intelligence ethics; healthcare data
1. Introduction
In today’s data-driven world, data quality has become a decisive factor in advanc-
ing science, ensuring reliable decision-making, and achieving organizational success. In
healthcare, business, and public administration alike, low-quality data can lead to flawed
conclusions, wasted resources, and significant social and economic harm [1–4]. Data qual-
ity is commonly understood as the extent to which data are “fit for use” in supporting
Data 2025, 10, 201
https://doi.org/10.3390/data10120201

Data 2025, 10, 201
2 of 40
operations, planning, and decision-making [5,6]. This definition highlights that quality is
not an absolute property but a context-dependent attribute that must be assessed relative
to specific goals and users.
Frameworks such as ISO/IEC 25012 and ISO 8000 define data quality in terms of
dimensions, including accuracy, completeness, and consistency [7–9].
Most studies treat technical, ethical, and sectoral aspects of data quality separately.
Integrated approaches remain scarce [10–12]. This fragmentation hinders practitioners who
must navigate disparate studies to implement comprehensive data management practices.
This review synthesizes literature on data quality across three domains: standards,
sectoral applications (e.g., healthcare, CRM), and emerging links with governance, ethics,
and AI.
This principle is critically important for research, as ensuring data quality is a prereq-
uisite for transparency, reproducibility, and accountability in the scientific process. Robust
data quality practices enhance the traceability of datasets and the credibility of scientific
conclusions, aligning with broader initiatives such as the FAIR principles, which stipulate
that data should be Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable.
This narrative review offers a unique contribution by synthesizing three areas that
are seldom connected: established theoretical frameworks, practical applications in the
business world, and emerging trends such as ethical governance and the use of Artificial
Intelligence (AI) in data management. Unlike works that focus on a single dimension, this
review offers a holistic perspective that connects technical challenges with their organiza-
tional and ethical implications, underscoring their direct impact on scientific reproducibility
and strategic decision-making.
Data quality is typically assessed through a set of measurable dimensions—accuracy,
completeness, consistency, timeliness, relevance, and validity—which collectively provide
a framework for identifying and addressing potential issues [10,13,14]. These dimensions
are widely applied across domains, including Customer Relationship Management (CRM).
In SMEs, for example, failures in CRM implementation have often been linked to poor data
quality—particularly in terms of accuracy, consistency, and completeness—underscoring
the importance of robust evaluation tools and processes [12].
2. Material and Methods
2.1. Review Design and Reporting
We conducted a comprehensive narrative literature review to synthesize the evolution
of data quality concepts, frameworks, and practices, explicitly bridging academic theory
and industry- and standards-based practices. Reporting adheres to good-practice elements
for transparent search descriptions (PRISMA-S items, where applicable). The time window
was 1996–2025, chosen to capture foundational work (e.g., the consumer-centric “fitness for
use” perspective emerging in the mid-1990s) and contemporary developments in AI, ethics,
and standards; searches were last updated on 8 October 2025. No protocol was registered,
given the narrative (non-systematic) design.
Rationale for Methodological Choices
We adopted a narrative rather than a systematic review design for several reasons.
First, the field of data quality spans diverse domains (healthcare, business, public admin-
istration, software engineering) with heterogeneous methodologies that preclude meta-
analytic synthesis. Second, our objective was conceptual integration—connecting theoreti-
cal frameworks (ISO standards, academic models) with practical applications and emerging
trends (AI, ethics, FAIR)—rather than estimating quantitative effects. Third, we deliberately
included grey literature (ISO/IEC standards, technical reports) alongside peer-reviewed

Data 2025, 10, 201
3 of 40
articles to capture industry practices and normative frameworks that systematic reviews
typically exclude.
The 1996–2025 timeframe was chosen strategically to encompass three critical periods:
(1) the foundational consumer-centric perspective of data quality [15]); (2) the formalization
of international standards (ISO 8000 series, 2011–2015; ISO/IEC 25012); and (3) contempo-
rary developments in AI ethics, governance frameworks, and FAIR principles for research
data (2015–2025). This 29-year window captures both the field’s historical evolution and its
current state.
Database selection balanced comprehensiveness with relevance. PubMed/MEDLINE
provides coverage of biomedical and health sciences, while Scopus offers a multidisci-
plinary breadth with strong indexing of computer science and business literature. Web
of Science ensures access to high-impact journals across disciplines, and Google Scholar
facilitates the discovery of grey literature, preprints, and non-indexed sources. Together,
these sources cover the theoretical, applied, and standards-based literature essential to our
synthesis.
2.2. Information Sources
We searched four sources: PubMed/MEDLINE, Scopus, Web of Science Core Collec-
tion (WoS), and Google Scholar. To ensure comprehensive coverage of practice frameworks
and technical specifications, we supplemented database searches with standards and grey
literature (e.g., ISO/IEC 25012, ISO 8000) from relevant standards bodies and agencies.
2.3. Search Strategy
Search strings combined controlled vocabulary (where available) and free-text terms
for the core concepts: data quality/information quality, dimensions, governance/ethics,
and FAIR/standards.
PubMed (Title/Abstract + MeSH):
(“data quality” [MeSH] OR “data quality” [tiab] OR “information quality” [tiab])
AND (“Artificial Intelligence” [MeSH] OR “Artificial Intelligence” [tiab] OR AI [tiab]) AND
(governance [tiab] OR ethics [tiab] OR FAIR [tiab])
Filters: 1996–2025; no language restriction. To align with the inclusion criteria (i) and
focus the narrative synthesis, the search results were pre-filtered using the following
“Article Types”: “Review”, “Systematic Review”, and “Meta-Analysis”.
Scopus (TITLE-ABS-KEY):
TITLE-ABS-KEY ((“data quality” OR “information quality”) AND (“Artificial Intelli-
gence” OR “AI”) AND (governance OR ethics OR FAIR)) AND (PUBYEAR > 1995 AND
PUBYEAR < 2026) Results were pre-filtered by “Document Type” to include “Review”.
To supplement the search and align with the inclusion criteria for conference papers
and grey literature, the Scopus search was expanded. Using the same search string, an
additional search was conducted and bulk-exported using the “Secondary documents”
filter, which Scopus uses to categorize publications such as conference proceedings and
book chapters. The “Preprint” (Beta) tab was also queried; however, as this section lacked
a bulk export function, its results (N = 67) were manually screened by title for relevance.
Potentially relevant preprints were then imported individually into EndNote for inclusion
in the formal screening process.
Web of Science (TS Topic):
TS = (“data quality” OR “information quality”) AND TS = (“Artificial Intelligence”
OR AI) AND TS = (governance OR ethics OR FAIR) Timespan: 1996–2025; Indexes:
SCI-EXPANDED, SSCI, A&HCI, ESCI. To ensure methodological consistency with the

Data 2025, 10, 201
4 of 40
PubMed search, these results were pre-filtered using the “Document Type” filter for
“Review Article”.
Google Scholar (broad discovery; first ~200 results screened):
(“data quality” OR “information quality”) AND (“Artificial Intelligence” OR “AI”)
AND (governance OR ethics OR FAIR) Backward/forward citation chasing of sentinel
papers and targeted searches on standards/agency sites supplemented all queries.
Search String Development and Validation
Search strings were developed iteratively through pilot searches and refined based
on retrieved results and expert consultation among the author team. The search strategy
combined three core concept blocks to ensure comprehensive coverage: data quality ter-
minology, application domains and frameworks, and emerging themes such as artificial
intelligence, governance, and FAIR principles. This multi-faceted approach allowed us to
capture both foundational literature and contemporary developments.
For PubMed, we employed both Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) controlled vocab-
ulary and free-text keywords to maximize sensitivity while maintaining specificity. The
search combined terms related to data quality (“data quality” [MeSH] OR “data quality”
[tiab] OR “information quality” [tiab]) with methodological and conceptual terms (“dimen-
sions” [tiab] OR “framework” [tiab] OR “assessment” [tiab] OR “management” [tiab]), and
domain-specific or thematic keywords (“healthcare” [tiab] OR “CRM” [tiab] OR “business”
[tiab] OR “governance” [tiab] OR “FAIR” [tiab] OR “artificial intelligence” [tiab] OR “AI”
[tiab]). Publication date filters were set to 1996–2025, and article type filters restricted
results to Review, Systematic Review, and Meta-Analysis to align with our inclusion criteria
and focus on synthesis papers rather than primary empirical studies.
For Scopus and Web of Science, we adapted the search strategy using platform-specific
field tags. In Scopus, we used TITLE-ABS-KEY to search titles, abstracts, and keywords,
whereas in Web of Science, we used the TS (Topic) field. To maintain consistency across
databases, we applied document type filters, selecting “Review” in Scopus and “Review
Article” in Web of Science. These filters ensured that our results were comparable and
focused on synthesizing literature across all platforms.
Google Scholar searches employed simplified query strings due to platform limitations
and the absence of advanced filtering options. We screened the first 200 results, ranked
by relevance, a pragmatic approach commonly adopted in reviews that incorporate grey
literature. Citation chasing—both backward (reference lists of key articles) and forward
(articles citing seminal works)—supplemented database searches to identify foundational
papers and recent applications that might not surface through keyword searches alone.
No language restrictions were applied to maximize coverage, though non-English
articles were primarily identified through their English abstracts. Date filters (1996–2025)
were consistently applied across all platforms.
2.4. Eligibility Criteria
Inclusion:
(i)
peer-reviewed articles, reviews, or conference papers that explicitly define, model,
assess, or manage data quality;
(ii)
standards or technical reports describing data-quality frameworks or dimensions;
(iii)
sectoral applications (healthcare, business/CRM, public administration) illustrating
implications for decision-making, governance, ethics, or FAIR/reproducibility.
Exclusion:
(i)
opinion/editorial pieces without methodological detail;

Data 2025, 10, 201
5 of 40
(ii)
works focused solely on cybersecurity or privacy without a substantive data-
quality component;
(iii)
non-scholarly web content lacking sources;
(iv)
duplicates and superseded versions;
(v)
articles in which “data quality” was addressed only as routine data cleaning within the
methodology of a specific empirical study (e.g., dietary intake and cancer association
studies) without contributing to broader conceptual, methodological, or framework-
oriented discussions of data quality.
2.5. Screening and Selection
All records were exported and deduplicated using EndNote version 20 and then
exported to the app new.rayyan.ai. Screening proceeded in two stages: (1) title/abstract
screening for relevance, followed by (2) full-text assessment to confirm eligibility. Screening
was performed in duplicate (MGA, LGA); disagreements were resolved by discussion, with
senior author adjudication (FGG or IAO) as needed.
2.6. Data Extraction
A piloted form captured bibliographic data, sector, and study type; definitions of
data quality; dimensions and measurement approaches; governance/ethical components;
alignment with FAIR/standards (ISO/IEC 25012, ISO 8000); tools/metrics; and reported
outcomes/use-cases. Extraction was conducted independently by two reviewers with
consensus adjudication.
To ensure the systematic and consistent extraction of information from included
sources, we developed a structured data extraction form, which was piloted on 10 randomly
selected articles and iteratively refined based on feedback from the extraction team. The
form captured multiple categories of information: bibliographic details (authors, year,
journal, DOI), study characteristics (domain, design, sample size or scope), definitions and
conceptualizations of data quality, specific dimensions addressed (accuracy, completeness,
timeliness, etc.), frameworks or standards referenced (such as ISO 8000, ISO/IEC 25012, or
FAIR principles), methods used for data quality assessment or assurance, governance or
ethical considerations discussed, and key findings and stated limitations.
Data extraction was performed in Microsoft Excel for Microsoft 365 Apps for enterprise,
Version 2509 (Build 19231.20216), Current Channel (Microsoft Corporation, Redmond, WA,
USA). One reviewer initially extracted each article, and a second reviewer independently
verified it. Discrepancies or ambiguities were flagged for discussion and resolved through
consensus or, when necessary, consultation with a senior author. This dual-extraction and
verification process enhanced the reliability and completeness of extracted data.
For grey literature sources, including international standards documents (e.g., ISO
8000 series, ISO/IEC 25012) and technical reports from standards bodies or governmental
agencies, we extracted normative definitions, prescribed dimensions and metrics, imple-
mentation guidance, and any case examples or sector-specific applications. We carefully
recorded version numbers, publication years, and issuing organizations to ensure accurate
citation and to distinguish between different editions or updates of the same standard.
2.7. Quality Appraisal and Source Credibility
Given the conceptual/standards-oriented scope, formal risk-of-bias tools for interven-
tional/observational studies were not applicable. Instead, we appraised source credibility
(peer review, issuing body for standards), recency, scope/transferability, and internal coher-
ence of frameworks. For empirical applications, we documented design features germane
to interpreting data-quality claims.

Data 2025, 10, 201
6 of 40
2.8. Synthesis Methods
Due to heterogeneity, we used thematic synthesis. Two reviewers independently coded
texts, refined a shared codebook, and grouped findings into: (1) definitions/dimensions;
(2) standards/formal frameworks; (3) governance and ethics; (4) FAIR and reproducibil-
ity; (5) sectoral applications; (6) assurance methods/tools. Themes were mapped to a
conceptual schema that links data quality, governance/ethics, and FAIR principles to
reproducibility and decision-making.
Software and Tools
Reference management and deduplication were performed using EndNote (Clarivate
Analytics, Philadelphia, PA, USA) for initial import and automated duplicate detection,
followed by manual verification in new.rayyan.ai. This process facilitated collaborative
screening through shared libraries and manual tagging, and reasons for exclusion were
documented for transparency and traceability.
Data extraction and synthesis were carried out using Microsoft Excel 365. Qualitative
coding followed an iterative codebook approach: themes were identified from an initial
subset of articles, refined through team discussions, and then systematically applied to
the entire corpus. Codes were managed in parallel Excel workbooks by two indepen-
dent reviewers (MGA, LGA), which were periodically merged and reconciled to resolve
discrepancies and ensure uniform application of the coding framework.
We did not employ specialized systematic review software, such as Covidence or
DistillerSR, as our narrative design did not require features specific to systematic reviews,
including automated risk-of-bias assessment tools, meta-analytic capabilities, or standard-
ized reporting templates for intervention studies. The selected tools provided sufficient
functionality for the transparent and reproducible management of a narrative synthesis,
while maintaining accessibility and cost-effectiveness for our research team.
2.9. Grey Literature and Standards Handling
Standards and technical reports (e.g., ISO 8000; ISO/IEC 25012) were treated as author-
itative grey literature and included if they defined data-quality constructs or prescribed
assessment/assurance requirements. Version and year, as well as scope, were recorded and
cross-walked against academic frameworks.
2.10. Data Management and Reproducibility
The findings were synthesized thematically, highlighting dimensions, methodologies,
and applications of data quality.
3. Definitions and Frameworks of Data Quality
3.1. Standards and ISO 8000
ISO 8000, the international data quality standard, originated in the NATO Codification
System (NCS), a framework for cataloging material items with uniform descriptions and
codes that improves inventory management and supply chain efficiency [16]. In 2004,
NATO Allied Committee 135 and the Electronic Commerce Code Management Association
(ECCMA) formalized its promotion as the basis for an international standard. This collabo-
ration led to ISO 8000, which built on the NCS’s emphasis on precise, standardized data
descriptions and management practices, refined over decades [7,14,16].
ISO 8000 defines quality data as “portable data that meets stated requirements” [7].
Data must be separable from a software application (portable) and comply with explicit,
unambiguous requirements set by the user or consumer [7]. The standard provides com-
prehensive frameworks for both conceptualizing and measuring data quality [8], thereby

Data 2025, 10, 201
7 of 40
aligning with broader initiatives in data portability and preservation, and enabling organi-
zations to define, request, and verify data quality using standard conventions [8].
Complementing ISO 8000, ISO 25012 provides a foundational model with 15 di-
mensions of data quality, including accuracy, completeness, consistency, and traceability,
initially designed for software but now widely applied across domains [9].
3.2. Frameworks
Wang and Strong developed a widely used framework with four dimensions: [15]
(Table 1)
Table 1. Comparison of Major Data Quality Definitions and Frameworks (1996–2024). The table
contrasts consumer-oriented conceptual models with formal international standards, highlighting
key dimensions and practical applications across different organizational contexts.
Source/Standard
Definition of Data Quality
Key Dimensions/Emphasis
Notes
Wang & Strong [15]
Data quality is data that is fit for
use by data consumers
Intrinsic (accuracy, objectivity)
Contextual (relevance,
timeliness, completeness)
Representational
(interpretability, consistency)
Accessibility (access, security).
Highly influential conceptual
framework;
consumer-oriented.
Strong, Lee & Wang [14]
Emphasizes data quality as
“fitness for use” in operations,
decision-making, and planning.
Same four categories as above.
Extends the earlier framework
with an organizational
perspective.
Pipino, Lee & Wang [17]
Defines data quality through
measurable attributes that reflect
accuracy, completeness,
consistency, and timeliness.
Quantitative measures for
core dimensions.
Introduces practical tools for
data quality assessment.
Ehrlinger & Wöß [18]
Data quality as a
multidimensional construct is
influenced by context and use.
Highlights timeliness,
completeness, plausibility,
integrity, and
multifacetedness.
Extends beyond classical
dimensions and focuses on
big data.
Haug, Zachariassen [19]
Suggests that “perfect” data
quality is neither achievable nor
optimal; instead, the right level
balances costs of maintenance vs.
costs of poor data.
Trade-off between quality
maintenance effort and
business impact.
Cost-oriented perspective.
Intrinsic—data should be accurate, reliable, and error-free;
Contextual—relevance depends on the task or use case;
Representational—clarity and proper formatting enable correct interpretation;
Accessibility—data must be available to users when and where needed.
Data quality should be systematically assessed using both subjective perceptions and
objective measures [17]. In healthcare, for instance, reliable data underpins patient records,
diagnostics, research, and public health monitoring.
Information quality has been integrated into business process modeling to address po-
tential deficiencies at the design stage, rather than relying solely on post-hoc cleansing [20].
In Customer Relationship Management (CRM), high-quality data enables segmentation,
forecasting, and targeted marketing, directly affecting satisfaction and business perfor-
mance, while poor-quality data undermines insights and decision-making [10,21]. Practical
management requires preprocessing, profiling, and cleansing to ensure accurate analyt-
ics [1,11,17,18,22–24].
The dimensions based on ISO 25012 were later extended by aggregating 262 terms,
a process that incorporated governance, usefulness, quantity, and semantics [25]. This

Data 2025, 10, 201
8 of 40
addresses terminology fragmentation and promotes cross-sector collaboration. A com-
plementary approach grounded in the FAIR principles proposes quality ascertained from
comprehensive metadata, decoupling intrinsic properties from subjective needs and facili-
tating reuse across contexts [25]. These principles have been extended to research software
(FAIR4RS) [26].
Recent methods embed information quality requirements directly into business pro-
cess models. One such technique involves “information quality fragments”: modular
components designed to integrate checks for accessibility, completeness, accuracy, and
consistency, which improves efficiency and reduces modeling time [27].
Beyond business contexts, frameworks for public administration emphasize both
organizational and technological aspects. Studies of Ukrainian e-government reveal that
staff skills, process design, and management practices are crucial for ensuring high-quality
information in government [28].
A notable theoretical contribution is the “Objective Information Theory,” which defines
information through a sextuple structure and nine metrics—such as extensity, richness, va-
lidity, and distribution—offering a systematic basis for quantitative analysis [29]. Building
on this, research in the judicial domain has applied six-tuple information theory and rough
set knowledge to develop measurable standards for document quality, showing that even
text-driven contexts like court documents can benefit from formalized models that quantify
accuracy, completeness, and semantic fidelity [30].
The FAIR principles have also been extended beyond data to research software, em-
phasizing that reproducibility depends not only on datasets but also on the tools and
code that process them [31]. Together, these approaches underscore the diverse contribu-
tions of models of information quality to decision-making and broader outcomes across
various sectors.
3.3. Scope of Data Quality in Data Analytics
In data analytics, data quality is paramount: analytical models and algorithms depend
on accurate and complete inputs to generate meaningful insights and support sound
decision-making. Models trained on flawed data can yield unreliable predictions, leading
to misguided strategies. Conversely, high-quality data enhances the accuracy, fairness,
robustness, and scalability of machine learning models, underscoring the importance of
specialized tools in the era of data-centric AI [32,33].
Role in Data Analytics
Within Customer Relationship Management (CRM), data quality is especially critical.
Reliable and consistent datasets enable accurate predictive modeling, such as customer
lifetime value (CLV) estimations and RFM (Recency, Frequency, and Monetary) analysis,
which supports effective segmentation, investment optimization, and customer equity
assessment systems [13,32,34]. Well-maintained datasets enhance the effectiveness of
predictive modeling. Poor data quality, by contrast, compromises analytics, leading to
misinformed decisions, missed opportunities, and weakened strategies [32,35].
The importance of data quality tools is reflected in a 2022 systematic review, which
identified 667 solutions for profiling, measurement, and automated monitoring [18]. Nev-
ertheless, despite this breadth, many organizations still rely on rudimentary methods: a
German survey found that 66% of companies validate data quality with Excel or Access,
and 63% do so manually without long-term planning [36]. Within CRM, this gap between
available technologies and organizational practices highlights the persistent challenges of
implementing comprehensive, scalable data quality management.

Data 2025, 10, 201
9 of 40
4. Dimensions of Data Quality
4.1. Accuracy
Accuracy refers to the extent to which data represent the real-world construct they de-
scribe [35]. It can be quantified through error rates, field- and record-level measures [18,32],
and newer metrics that distinguish between random and systematic errors [37]. Accuracy
is especially critical for ensuring reliable insights in analytics and marketing, where deci-
sions must reflect actual market conditions [12,21]. Accuracy is particularly challenging in
CRM contexts, where customer attributes change frequently, requiring ongoing validation
procedures to maintain reliable profiles [32].
4.2. Completeness
Completeness refers to the presence of all required data for a given purpose [18]. In
CRM systems, completeness enables the creation of reliable customer profiles and supports
accurate analytical outcomes, thereby reducing the risk of biased segmentation or decision-
making [21].
4.3. Consistency
Consistency refers to the uniform representation of data across sources and systems,
ensuring that values are not in conflict [34].
4.4. Timeliness
Timeliness concerns whether data are sufficiently up to date to support effective
decision-making. Real-time data is vital in domains such as stock trading, where rapid
changes demand instant responses At the same time, daily or weekly updates may be suffi-
cient for inventory management, helping to prevent overproduction or stockouts [38,39].
Timeliness depends on collection methods, processing speed, and update frequency, requir-
ing organizations to minimize latency and ensure data is current [39–51].
A related challenge is data decay—the gradual obsolescence of information—seen in
marketing, where up to 40% of email addresses change every two years [35]. Mitigating
decay and maintaining timeliness are crucial for reliable analytics, resource efficiency, and
improved decision-making [52].
4.5. Relevance
Relevance assesses how well data supports specific business needs and decision-
making [15]. Data must serve its intended purpose, aligning with organizational objectives
and challenges [53]. For example, accurate purchase histories may not fully explain cus-
tomer churn if they lack information on satisfaction or service interactions; incorporating
sentiment data provides more relevant insights.
Relevance is highly context-dependent, varying across different organizational ar-
eas [54]. Marketing departments prioritize demographics, purchasing behavior, and market
trends to craft effective strategies. At the same time, financial teams focus on cash flow,
revenue, and expenses for accurate planning. Thus, relevance is not static but shifts with
users’ goals and requirements.
Measuring relevance ensures that collected information contributes to informed deci-
sions. Common approaches include tracking dataset usage, assessing “time to analysis”
(shorter times reflect higher relevance), and gathering user feedback to identify gaps [55].
By aligning data with context-specific needs, organizations ensure that analytics are not
only accurate but also meaningful for strategy and performance.

Data 2025, 10, 201
10 of 40
4.6. Validity
Validity ensures that data accurately represent real-world constructs and comply with
predefined standards and business rules [56]. It assesses conformity to formats, ranges,
and logical relationships—for example, a date of birth within a realistic range or an address
following national conventions [54]. Validity encompasses several forms: content validity,
which confirms that a dataset includes all relevant aspects [57]; construct validity, which
ensures alignment with theoretical concepts [58,59]; and criterion-related validity, which
evaluates the predictive power [60].
Invalid data can cause flawed analyses, poor decisions, and operational disruptions.
Examples include failed deliveries to incorrect addresses [61], misleading financial data
that affects investors, or inaccurate market research leading to wasted resources. Validity
also supports integration and interoperability, as adherence to shared rules and formats
facilitates combining data from multiple sources [57].
In the era of big data and AI, validity is increasingly critical: high-quality inputs
underpin reliable models and algorithms, while advanced analytics can also help vali-
date data [59,60]. Thus, validity is both a safeguard and an enabler of trustworthy data-
driven processes.
4.7. Emerging Dimensions (Plausibility, Multifacetedness, Integrity)
Beyond classical attributes, new dimensions, such as governance, usefulness, quality,
and semantics, have been proposed [62]. Governance refers to the accountability and
authority structures that guide data activities. Usefulness emphasizes adaptability and
reusability. Quantity addresses sufficiency and scalability. Semantics ensure that data
meaning is preserved across systems. These additions reflect evolving understandings of
data quality in contexts such as IoT, big data, and knowledge graphs.
Table 2 summarizes the main dimensions of data quality, including their definitions,
practical examples, and measurement approaches.
Table 2. Core dimensions of data quality: operational definitions, practical examples, and measure-
ment approaches. The report provides actionable criteria for assessing data quality across seven
fundamental dimensions commonly applied in healthcare, business, and research contexts.
Dimension
Definition
Practical Example
Measurement Approach
Accuracy
The degree to which data
correctly describes the real-world
object or event.
Patient’s recorded blood pressure
matches the actual measurement.
Comparison against an
authoritative source or ground
truth.
Completeness
The extent to which all required
data is present.
The customer database contains
contact details for all clients.
Ratio of available values to
required values; percentage of
missing fields.
Consistency
Absence of contradictions within
and across datasets.
A patient’s birthdate is consistent
across both electronic health
records and insurance records.
Cross-field and cross-database
validation checks.
Timeliness
The degree to which data is up to
date and available when needed.
Stock market prices updated in
real time.
Lag time between data generation
and availability for use.
Validity
Degree to which data conforms to
defined formats, rules, or ranges.
Postal codes follow the official
national standard.
Validation rules, format checks,
and range constraints.
Relevance
Appropriateness of data for the
intended use.
Including clinical trial data when
evaluating a new treatment.
Expert judgment; alignment with
analytical or decision-making
needs.
Uniqueness
The degree to which data is free
of duplicate records.
Each patient has a single unique
medical record number.
Duplicate detection and record
linkage algorithms.

Data 2025, 10, 201
11 of 40
5. Impact and Evidence: Consequences and Case Studies of Data Quality
Management
5.1. Multidimensional Consequences of Poor Data Quality
Organizations that neglect data quality face serious and multifaceted consequences.
Research demonstrates that poor data quality generates quantifiable harm across multi-
ple dimensions: financial losses, compromised decision-making, operational inefficiency,
reputational damage, and missed strategic opportunities.
5.1.1. Financial Impact
The financial consequences of poor data quality are substantial and well-documented.
Gartner estimates annual losses of USD 12.9 million per organization, while IBM reports
that U.S. businesses collectively lose over USD 3.1 trillion annually due to data quality
issues [61,63]. Industry-specific studies indicate that organizations can lose up to 6%
of their sales due to poor customer data management]. In CRM systems, inaccurate or
inconsistent records distort insights, inflate costs, and reduce efficiency. Such issues often
require costly cleansing and manual intervention—costs that exponentially exceed those of
prevention [64–68].
5.1.2. Operational and Strategic Consequences
Low-quality data leads directly to flawed segmentation, poor targeting, and reduced
strategic effectiveness. In CRM systems, outdated contact details or incorrect names
undermine marketing efforts and customer relationship strategies. Time, money, and
credibility are wasted addressing the consequences of these errors [69–75]. Industry experts
estimate that data quality challenges cost companies 10–30% of their annual revenue [55].
5.1.3. Resource Waste and Operational Inefficiency
Cleaning inaccurate or incomplete data is a significant and resource-intensive task [76].
Manual and automated correction efforts are expensive and often consume disproportionate
organizational resources—tasks performed with incorrect data cost 100 times more than
those performed with accurate data [61,77]. In CRM systems, poor validation can erode
user trust and compromise adoption, particularly in small and medium-sized enterprises
(SMEs), where frequent inconsistencies are typical [78–81]. Robust cleaning practices—such
as removing duplicates, filling in missing values, and discarding outdated entries—reduce
remediation costs and risks; yet, many organizations continue to rely on rudimentary
methods [18]. Similar findings have been reported in the CRM literature, which highlights
the persistence of low-maturity data quality practices despite the recognized strategic
importance of clean data [10].
5.1.4. Reputational Damage and Stakeholder Trust
Incorrect interactions or failed campaigns erode customer trust and damage brand
image [82]. When organizations deliver poor customer experiences due to inaccurate
data—such as duplicate mailings, incorrect product recommendations, or failed ser-
vice interactions—the reputational consequences extend beyond immediate financial
losses [83–85]. Trust, once damaged, is difficult to restore and has a direct impact on
customer loyalty and organizational competitiveness [85–89].
5.1.5. Missed Opportunities and Competitive Disadvantage
Poor-quality data contributes to wasted potential and missed strategic opportunities.
Up to 45% of generated leads are deemed unusable due to duplication, invalid email
addresses, or incomplete records [90]. In healthcare, incomplete patient records can obscure

Data 2025, 10, 201
12 of 40
critical patterns, delaying medical discoveries and compromising research progress [91–93].
In business intelligence, poor-quality data hinders accurate market segmentation and
opportunity identification, preventing the identification of opportunities and hindering
innovation and competitive positioning [94]. Such missed opportunities amplify long-
term competitive disadvantages, as organizations lose market share to competitors with
superior data practices [95]. Table 3 summarizes these multidimensional consequences
across sectors, demonstrating the financial, operational, reputational, and strategic impacts
of inadequate data quality management.
Table 3. Multidimensional consequences of poor data quality across sectors. Seven major consequence
categories are illustrated with real-world examples from healthcare, finance, logistics, and public
administration, demonstrating the financial, operational, reputational, and regulatory impacts of
inadequate data quality management.
Consequence
Definition
Practical Example
Impact/Cost
Faulty decision-making
Wrong or suboptimal
choices based on
inaccurate data.
A hospital prescribes
inappropriate treatment
due to errors in lab data.
Patient harm, liability risks,
loss of trust.
Financial losses
Direct or indirect costs
from incorrect, incomplete,
or duplicated data.
A bank suffers
multimillion-dollar losses
due to flawed credit risk
models.
Wasted resources, loss of
revenue.
Operational inefficiencies
Processes slowed or
disrupted due to unreliable
information.
Logistics companies
misroute deliveries due to
inaccurate addresses.
Increased workload,
delays, and higher costs.
Reputational damage
Erosion of trust from
stakeholders, customers, or
the public.
Data breaches and
reporting errors damage a
company’s brand.
Customer attrition, lower
market share.
Regulatory and legal risks
Non-compliance with laws
and standards due to poor
data.
A pharmaceutical firm fails
an audit due to
inconsistent records.
Fines, sanctions,
reputational harm.
Missed opportunities
Failure to identify insights
or innovations.
Retailer loses potential
sales due to incomplete
CRM data.
Reduced competitiveness,
slower growth.
Misleading analytics
Models or reports based on
flawed inputs lead to
invalid results.
Overestimation of flu
outbreaks by Google Flu
Trends.
Misallocation of resources
leads to a loss of credibility.
Table 3 summarizes key consequences across domains.
5.2. High-Profile Failures: Learning from Data Quality Disasters
Real-world cases vividly illustrate the stakes of data quality and the serious conse-
quences of inadequate governance and technical oversight. Across various sectors, in-
cluding aerospace, finance, healthcare, technology, and public administration, data quality
failures have led to catastrophic losses, operational disruptions, and even loss of life.
5.2.1. Aerospace: NASA’s Mars Climate Orbiter
One of the most striking examples of the consequences of poor data quality occurred
in space exploration. NASA’s Mars Climate Orbiter was destroyed by a mismatch between
imperial and metric units—a $125 million failure of consistency [96–100]. This case ex-
emplifies how inadequate data validation processes and insufficient governance can lead
to catastrophic losses. The failure underscores that data quality is not merely a techni-

Data 2025, 10, 201
13 of 40
cal concern; it is a mission-critical issue that requires robust verification across multiple
organizational levels [101].
Lesson:
Standardization, validation, and clear governance protocols are non-
negotiable in high-stakes domains.
5.2.2. Technology: Unity Technologies’ Audience Pinpoint Error
A striking corporate example is Unity Technologies’ Audience Pinpoint algorithmic
failure, in which poor input data fed into machine learning models produced faulty al-
gorithms that ultimately resulted in USD 110 million in losses and a 37% decline in stock
value [102]. The error illustrates how inadequate data quality upstream—at the data
sourcing and preparation stage—can propagate through AI systems, leading to significant
business failures [103].
Lesson: AI systems are only as reliable as their training data; governance must begin
at the data ingestion stage.
5.2.3. Public Administration: Data Inaccuracy in Criminal Justice
Research into computerized criminal records in the U.S. reveals that these records
are often inaccurate or incomplete, thereby undermining the reliability of the justice sys-
tem [104–106]. Poor information quality introduces inefficiencies and errors with serious
social consequences highlighting the need to align process design with information sys-
tem requirements from the outset [107–113]. This case demonstrates that even critical
public-sector systems remain vulnerable to data quality failures [112].
Lesson: Organizational accountability and robust process design are essential, even in
mission-critical public functions.
5.2.4. Financial Sector: Data Silo Architecture and Systemic Risk
In financial institutions, legacy “data silos” can perpetuate duplication, inconsistency,
and limited access, hampering analytics and decision-making [111,113–116]. The decen-
tralized storage and inconsistent data entry practices created systemic risk throughout the
organization [117,118]. Transitioning toward modern paradigms, such as the Data Mesh
architecture, has improved availability and quality across the enterprise, demonstrating
that organizational architecture directly impacts data quality outcomes [119–122].
Lesson: Data governance is as much an architectural issue as a technical one; silos are
a structural vulnerability [119,123–125].
5.3. Success Stories: Data Quality as a Strategic Asset
In contrast to failures, organizations and sectors that invest in robust data quality
frameworks achieve measurable competitive advantages, improved decision-making, and
strategic success.
5.3.1. E-Commerce: Netflix’s Data-Driven Success
Netflix’s personalized recommendation system illustrates how high-quality data can
become a strategic asset. By leveraging user behavior data with rigorous quality standards,
Netflix drives over 80% of platform consumption through recommendations. The system’s
reliability depends on continuous data validation, user feedback integration, and quality
monitoring—not just advanced algorithms [126–130].
Lesson: High-quality data, coupled with effective governance, enables competitive
differentiation and fosters customer loyalty.

Data 2025, 10, 201
14 of 40
5.3.2. Healthcare: Multicenter Clinical Database Excellence
A multicenter clinical database study has demonstrated the effectiveness of semi-
automated data quality assessments in detecting widespread issues across multiple health-
care facilities [131–133]. A balanced approach that integrates automation with targeted
manual review optimizes both efficiency and accuracy [134,135]. Organizations implement-
ing comprehensive quality frameworks report greater data reliability, fewer clinical errors,
and improved patient outcomes [136–140].
Lesson: In healthcare, robust data governance is essential for protecting patient safety
and maintaining research integrity; investment is non-negotiable.
5.3.3. Business Operations: CRM Implementation with Strong Governance
Organizations that implement comprehensive CRM governance frameworks report
measurably improved customer segmentation, more effective targeted marketing, stronger
customer relationships, and higher operational efficiency. These successes share common
traits: clear ownership, standardized collection, automated validation, regular monitoring,
and sustained leadership commitment to continuous improvement [141–144].
Lesson: Sustained success requires embedding quality mechanisms into workflows,
not retrofitting them afterward.
5.4. Cross-Sector Patterns: Where Data Quality Determines Outcomes
Synthesizing failures and successes across sectors reveals consistent patterns about
where data quality has the highest organizational impact and which governance approaches
work most effectively.
5.4.1. Healthcare Sector
Healthcare demonstrates perhaps the highest stakes for data quality. Patient safety,
clinical decision-making, research integrity, and public health monitoring all depend on
reliable data [145,146]. Qualitative research in Ethiopian public health facilities reveals
that inadequate training, weak governance, and insufficient infrastructure compromise the
timeliness, completeness, and accuracy of care, directly affecting patient outcomes [147].
Conversely, organizations that implement the WHO’s Data Quality Review toolkit and
establish clear governance frameworks achieve measurably better outcomes [136].
5.4.2. Finance and Investment
Financial institutions face unique data quality challenges due to the volume, velocity,
and regulatory requirements of economic data. Successful organizations transition to
modern architectures that prioritize data accessibility, consistency, and real-time monitoring,
reducing decision latency and regulatory risk [145–147].
5.4.3. E-Commerce and CRM
The customer relationship sector demonstrates that data quality directly correlates
with customer satisfaction, retention, and revenue [10,148–151]. Poor CRM data quality
leads to failed campaigns, customer frustration, and a loss of market share [152–154].
Successful implementations combine standardized data entry, automated validation, con-
tinuous monitoring, and user feedback integration, creating virtuous cycles of improve-
ment [7,17,23,155–157].
5.4.4. Public Administration
Government sector research shows that information technology alone does not en-
sure data quality [158,159]. Persistent shortcomings in public administration, including
insufficient staff training, weak governance structures, and organizational silos, undermine

Data 2025, 10, 201
15 of 40
data reliability [160,161]. Successful e-government initiatives combine clear governance,
adequate training, process redesign, and technological solutions [159,162].
5.4.5. Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs)
SMEs remain particularly vulnerable to data quality issues [23]. A study of 85 UK
SMEs found that deficits in technical skills and resources hinder the adoption of robust
practices [163]. However, SMEs that prioritize data quality frameworks and invest in staff
training achieve a competitive advantage in their markets [23,164].
Table 4 presents a comparative synthesis of failures and successes across these
sectors, illustrating both the variability of consequences and the universality of core
governance principles.
Table 4. Comparative case studies of data quality failures and successes. High-profile failures and
successful implementations are contrasted across multiple sectors, illustrating how data quality has
a direct impact on financial performance, operational efficiency, public trust, and organizational
competitiveness.
Case/Organization
Domain
Data Quality Issue
Consequence
Failures
Equifax [165]
Finance/Credit reporting
Inaccurate and poorly
managed consumer credit
data [166]
Erosion of public trust; legal
and financial consequences
[167]
NASA Mars Climate Orbiter
[101]
Aerospace/Engineering
Unit mismatch (imperial vs.
metric) not reconciled in data
systems [168]
Spacecraft loss (~$125 million)
Mid-sized enterprise (CRM
migration) [35]
Business/CRM
Data quality challenges
during migration from legacy
systems [23,64,169,170]
Errors, inconsistent formats,
and disruption in customer
management
Large home appliance
business [21]
Retail/CRM
Low completeness, timeliness,
and accuracy of customer data
[21,171]
Ineffective campaigns,
reduced loyalty, and weak
predictive performance
University fundraising CRM
[32].
Education/Fundraising
Outdated, incomplete, and
inaccurate alumni data
[172,173]
Reduced donor identification,
inefficient fundraising, wasted
resources
Target [126].
Retail/CRM
Predictive analytics revealed
sensitive customer
information [174]
Public backlash over privacy
intrusion
Google Flu Trends (2008–2013)
[175–177].
Public health analytics
Overfitting and reliance on
biased signals
Overestimation of flu cases;
credibility loss [178]
Amsterdam Tax Office [35].
Public sector
Duplicate and inconsistent
taxpayer records [179–181]
Inefficient operations; reduced
compliance [182]
Healthcare organizations
[34,183,184]
Healthcare/CRM
Incomplete or inconsistent
patient data in electronic
health records [131,185]
Medical errors, patient safety
risks
Successes of Data Quality
Netflix Recommendation
System [126–130].
Entertainment/Business
Leveraging high-quality
behavioral data for
personalization [127]
Recommendations drive 80%
of content consumption;
increased engagement and
revenue
Freight forwarding industry
[20]
Logistics/Freight forwarding
Workflow-embedded quality
checks across logistics
processes [186]
Improved coordination, fewer
customs delays, and reduced
correction costs

Data 2025, 10, 201
16 of 40
5.5. Synthesis: Why Data Quality Governance Matters
These cases and patterns collectively demonstrate that data quality failures are not
isolated technical incidents but symptoms of systemic governance gaps. Poor data quality
consistently arises from:
•
Inadequate process design at the point of data collection
•
Insufficient validation and verification mechanisms
•
Organizational silos that prevent information sharing and consistency
•
Weak leadership commitment to quality as a strategic priority
•
Insufficient training and unclear accountability structures
•
Delayed or absent monitoring and maintenance processes
Conversely, successful organizations share these characteristics:
•
Clear governance structures with defined roles and accountability
•
Quality mechanisms embedded throughout the data lifecycle (not retrofitted)
•
Continuous monitoring and feedback loops
•
Leadership commitment and resource allocation
•
Regular training and stakeholder engagement
•
Alignment of technology with organizational processes and objectives
These patterns underscore a critical insight: data quality challenges are as much orga-
nizational and social as they are technical [187–189]. Technology alone—even sophisticated
AI-driven validation systems—cannot resolve governance and cultural barriers [190,191].
Sustainable data quality requires the integration of technical solutions, organizational
design, clear governance, and committed leadership [192].
The financial, operational, and strategic costs of poor data quality far exceed the
investments required to prevent and maintain continuous quality assurance [191,193].
For practitioners and organizations, the decision is clear: treating data as a strategic
asset and investing in comprehensive quality governance is not optional but essential for
organizational success, scientific reproducibility, and informed decision-making [187,189].
6. Ensuring Data Quality: Methods and Best Practices
Ensuring high data quality requires a combination of standardized methodologies and
continuous validation. Effective data collection is fundamental: standardized procedures
and tools minimize errors at the source, while validation checks confirm that data entries
meet predefined criteria [194].
6.1. Data Collection Practices
In CRM adoption among SMEs, robust data collection processes are crucial for captur-
ing accurate and relevant customer information. This involves integrating multiple internal
and external sources and ensuring that data is timely and aligned with business objectives.
Systematic frameworks and staff training help maintain consistency and reduce errors such
as duplicate or incomplete records, which can undermine CRM performance [12].
Best practices include the use of automated data entry systems, regular cleaning pro-
cesses to eliminate inaccuracies, and validation checks to ensure consistency and accuracy.
Continuous monitoring and maintenance are crucial as data sources and systems evolve,
ensuring that quality standards are consistently maintained [10].
6.2. Data Cleaning and Validation
Data cleaning and validation are crucial for maintaining data quality, as they involve
detecting and correcting inaccuracies, inconsistencies, and missing values [12]. Automated
tools can efficiently flag anomalies, but critical production environments often require a

Data 2025, 10, 201
17 of 40
balanced approach that integrates manual review to ensure accuracy and reliability. A
multicenter clinical database study demonstrated the effectiveness of semi-automated
assessments in detecting widespread issues, while minimal manual checks remained
necessary to address errors missed by automation [195]. Regular monitoring and quality
reviews help sustain reliable datasets [12,196]. Establishing metrics and periodic audits
ensures data remains accurate, timely, and fit for analysis. In CRM systems, poor validation
can erode user trust and compromise adoption [34,35], particularly in SMEs facing frequent
inconsistencies [35]. Preventive controls and improved entry processes further minimize
errors [13].
Advanced methods, including deep learning models such as the Denoising Self-
Attention Network (DSAN), enhance the imputation of mixed-type tabular data by lever-
aging self-attention and multitask learning to predict substitutes for both numerical and
categorical fields [197]. Data fusion also improves reliability by integrating heterogeneous
sources, thereby reducing uncertainty and providing more comprehensive representa-
tions [198].
Ultimately, rigorous validation and governance policies [1] combined with automated
tools and audits [12] ensure consistent data quality. This is crucial for CRM, where reliable
data directly impacts campaign success, customer loyalty, and business performance [21].
6.3. Monitoring and Maintenance
Continuous monitoring and regular maintenance preserve data integrity by detecting
anomalies, cleansing outdated records, and ensuring consistent definitions across sys-
tems [18,199–202]. Effective collaboration among IT teams, data stewards, and business
users sustains reliability throughout the data lifecycle [203–205].
6.4. Governance/Ethics
Effective governance requires clear roles, responsibilities, and leadership commitment
throughout the data lifecycle [206], including compliance with regulations such as GDPR.
An integrated data and AI governance model spans four phases: (1) data sourc-
ing and preparation with ethical acquisition and bias detection, (2) model development
with fairness-aware validation, (3) deployment and operations with drift monitoring, and
(4) feedback and iteration to update policies dynamically [207]. Automated checkpoints
across these phases link data integrity with model ethics.
Responsible governance must extend beyond compliance to embed fairness, account-
ability, and inclusivity [208]. Ethical lapses can erode trust, reinforce biases, and lead to
harmful outcomes across various domains, such as healthcare and finance [209]. Embed-
ding ethical principles within governance frameworks ensures data quality is evaluated
not only for efficiency but also for societal impact.
These concerns are amplified in large language models, where massive training
datasets raise challenges of provenance, bias, and misuse. Robust governance of LLMs is
therefore essential to prevent social and economic harm [210].
7. Challenges and Proposed Solutions
Managing data quality in CRM systems presents challenges, including decentralized
storage, inconsistent data entry, and limited integration of diverse data sources. Proposed
solutions include standardizing collection procedures, using advanced integration tools,
and implementing comprehensive management frameworks to strengthen accuracy and
consistency [10].

Data 2025, 10, 201
18 of 40
7.1. Technical Challenges
Technical obstacles stem from data heterogeneity, scale, and limited automation. Inte-
grating multiple sources and processing large volumes of inconsistent or outdated informa-
tion remain critical difficulties [21]. These issues are exacerbated by web-based platforms
and SaaS models, which aggregate data from various internal and external sources [24].
Many organizations continue to rely on outdated or manual quality checks, which are
inadequate given the volume and velocity of contemporary data [18].
A further barrier is the lack of standardized terminology across sectors; Miller identi-
fied 262 distinct terms in the literature to describe aspects of data quality, which complicates
interoperability and hinders the adoption of automated assurance tools [62]. Addressing
these challenges requires not only technical solutions but also harmonized frameworks that
enable consistency and support effective, data-driven decision-making.
7.2. Organizational Challenges
The significance of data quality extends beyond technical systems to organizational
processes, as illustrated by studies showing that even computerized criminal records in
the U.S. are often inaccurate or incomplete [211]. Poor information quality undermines
workflows by introducing inefficiencies and errors, highlighting the need to align process
design with information system requirements from the outset [20]. Common issues include
inadequate data entry, poorly designed systems [13], weak leadership commitment, and
insufficient resource allocation.
AI adoption introduces new challenges. Automation of complex tasks can deskill
experts, reducing their role to passive monitoring and eroding the valuable expertise they
possess. The autonomy of AI systems also creates ambiguity over accountability, raising
legal and ethical questions when errors occur [208].
A systematic review of Data Science projects identified 27 barriers grouped into
six clusters: people, data and technology, management, economic, project, and external
factors. The most frequently cited included insufficient skills, lack of management support,
poor data quality, and misalignment between project goals and company objectives [212].
Addressing these barriers requires comprehensive governance, continuous training, and
systematic frameworks for data handling and interpretation [34].
Perfect data quality is neither achievable nor cost-effective. Organizations should
instead pursue the “right level” of quality, balancing maintenance efforts against the costs
of poor quality [213]. For large datasets, the marginal benefits of further improvements
diminish over time [32]. Relevance is another concern: as business needs evolve, datasets
may lose strategic value, and silos that isolate data within departments hinder efficient
decision-making [214,215]. Integrating quality assurance into process design reduces errors
and enhances reliability [20,27].
Public administration research confirms that technology alone does not ensure high-
quality information. Shortcomings such as insufficient training, weak governance, and
organizational inefficiencies limit outcomes, underscoring that data quality challenges in
government are rooted as much in people and structures as in systems [28].
7.3. Solutions
Organizations can address data quality challenges by adopting advanced, automated
tools, including AI and machine learning. These technologies enable continuous monitor-
ing, anomaly detection, and large-scale validation, surpassing the capabilities of manual
methods. Recent work demonstrates the potential of multi-agent AI systems, in which
“planner” and “executor” agents automatically generate and execute PySpark validation
code from natural-language prompts, adapting to evolving data sources [216]. However,

Data 2025, 10, 201
19 of 40
user acceptance remains a barrier: a survey of an AI-generated e-commerce platform
(ChatGPT-4 and DALL·E 3) revealed concerns about security and trust despite positive
evaluations of functionality and aesthetics [217].
Effective solutions also require developing business-relevant quality metrics to guide
decision-making and improvement strategies. AI-based frameworks can support Business
Intelligence (BI) and Decision Support Systems (DSS) through layered architectures: data
ingestion, quality assessment (e.g., Isolation Forests, BERT), cleansing and correction (e.g.,
KNN, LSTM), and monitoring with feedback loops [218]. Predictive approaches, such
as XGBoost, can correct anomalies across multiple dimensions (accuracy, completeness,
conformity, uniqueness, consistency, and readability), improving composite Data Quality
Index scores from 70% to over 90% in large-scale applications [219].
Beyond technology, sustainable quality depends on robust governance. Frameworks
should define criteria for data relevance, ensure alignment with organizational objectives,
and include regular audits to maintain validity [56]. Engaging stakeholders in data man-
agement further strengthens the practical utility of collected information.
8. Data Quality in the AI Era: Paradigm Shifts and Governance Implications
The emergence of artificial intelligence and machine learning as dominant paradigms
for data-driven decision-making has fundamentally altered the landscape of data qual-
ity [94,220,221]. Traditional frameworks, developed in an era when data primarily served
human analysts [222], must now accommodate systems in which algorithms themselves
are the primary consumers of data [223–225]. This section examines how AI reshapes
the conceptualization of data quality, challenges conventional governance structures, and
necessitates the integration of ethical considerations as core quality dimensions.
8.1. How AI Reshapes the Definition of Data Quality
Traditional definitions of data quality center on the concept of “fitness for use,”
whereby data are evaluated in relation to their capacity to support human decision-making
processes [1,3,226]. However, the rise of AI introduces a fundamental shift: data must now
be fit not only for human interpretation but also for algorithmic processing and training
machine learning models. This dual requirement expands the scope of data quality beyond
conventional dimensions.
Such failures demonstrate that poor input data can propagate through AI systems,
resulting in significant financial and operational consequences [165].
AI systems impose specific requirements that extend beyond traditional quality dimensions.
AI-Readiness: Data must be structured, annotated, and formatted in a way that allows
algorithms to process it efficiently. This includes requirements for standardized schemas,
consistent labeling in supervised learning contexts, and appropriate representation of
features for model input.
Algorithmic Fairness: Data quality must explicitly account for representation and
balance across demographic groups, domains, or categories to ensure fairness. Biased
training data perpetuate and amplify discrimination in algorithmic decision-making, as
demonstrated in healthcare, criminal justice, and financial domains [200,206,208,227–236].
Model Explainability and Traceability: High-quality data must support interpretability
requirements. Provenance, lineage, and metadata become critical not merely for repro-
ducibility but for understanding how algorithmic decisions are derived—essential for
regulatory compliance and ethical accountability.
These AI-specific requirements challenge the traditional separation between intrinsic
data properties (accuracy, completeness, and consistency) and contextual dimensions
(relevance and timeliness). In AI contexts, what constitutes “accurate” or “complete” data

Data 2025, 10, 201
20 of 40
depends fundamentally on the model architecture, training objectives, and deployment
context. A dataset may be adequate for descriptive analytics yet wholly insufficient for
predictive modeling if it lacks temporal coverage, feature diversity, or a sufficiently large
sample size for robust generalization.
Furthermore, AI introduces dynamic quality requirements. Unlike static reporting
or analysis, where data quality can be assessed once and maintained, machine learning
models require continuous monitoring of data quality throughout their operational lifecycle.
Model drift—the degradation of predictive performance over time as real-world conditions
change—requires ongoing validation to ensure that training data remain representative of
current conditions [18,63,69,181–183,205,207]. This temporal dimension transforms data
quality from a one-time assessment into a continuous assurance process.
Recent adaptations of the FAIR framework emphasize AI readiness and the need for
rigorous attention to provenance, bias detection, and ethical sourcing [25,26,208,236–240].
However, achieving AI readiness requires more than technical interoperability; it demands
rigorous attention to data provenance, bias detection, and ethical sourcing—considerations
that extend far beyond the original FAIR framework’s scope [236,241–245].
8.2. AI-Driven Challenges to Traditional Governance Frameworks
International standards such as ISO 8000 and ISO/IEC 25012 provide foundational
frameworks for data quality management [6,7,246]. These standards codify dimensions
(accuracy, completeness, consistency, timeliness, validity) and prescribe assessment method-
ologies that have proven effective in traditional business intelligence, reporting, and
operational contexts. However, these frameworks were developed in an era preceding
widespread AI adoption and therefore do not fully address the unique governance chal-
lenges introduced by algorithmic decision-making systems.
The regulatory landscape for AI governance is rapidly evolving to address these
challenges through comprehensive frameworks that mandate systematic approaches to
AI risk management and quality assurance [247]. Three pivotal normative instruments
exemplify this transformation: ISO/IEC 42001:2023 [246] establishes the first international
management system standard specifically for AI, providing organizations with a struc-
tured framework for the responsible deployment of AI that integrates quality management
principles with AI-specific risk controls [248]. The European Union’s AI Act (Regulation
2024/1689) [249] introduces the world’s first comprehensive regulatory framework with
legally binding requirements for high-risk AI systems, mandating rigorous data gover-
nance, transparency measures, and human oversight mechanisms that fundamentally
reshape how organizations must approach data quality throughout the AI lifecycle [250].
Similarly, NIST’s AI Risk Management Framework (AI RMF 1.0) [251] offers a voluntary yet
influential framework that emphasizes trustworthy AI characteristics—including validity,
reliability, accuracy, and fairness—directly linking data quality dimensions to AI gover-
nance outcomes. Together, these frameworks signal a paradigm shift from voluntary best
practices to mandatory compliance requirements, compelling organizations to implement
formal AI governance structures that embed data quality assurance as a core operational
imperative, rather than a technical consideration [252]. This regulatory convergence creates
both challenges and opportunities: while organizations face increased compliance burdens
and documentation requirements, these frameworks also provide standardized method-
ologies for addressing the complex interplay between data quality, algorithmic fairness,
and operational excellence in AI systems [253]. The implications extend beyond compli-
ance, as these normative instruments are reshaping market dynamics, with organizations
that demonstrate robust AI governance and data quality practices gaining competitive
advantages in terms of trust, market access, and regulatory alignment [254,255].

Data 2025, 10, 201
21 of 40
Scale and Velocity: AI systems often process data at volumes and speeds that render
manual validation infeasible. Traditional quality assurance methods—such as manual
review, rule-based validation, and periodic audits—cannot keep pace with the continuous
data ingestion and real-time processing demands of production AI systems, and use
approaches wholly inadequate for AI-driven environments [218,256].
Opacity and Interpretability: Machine learning models, particularly deep neural net-
works, operate as “black boxes” whose internal decision logic is opaque even to their
developers. This opacity creates accountability gaps: when an AI system produces an
erroneous or harmful output, determining whether the failure stems from poor data quality,
algorithmic bias, model misconfiguration, or deployment context becomes exceedingly
difficult [113,207,208,257]. Traditional governance frameworks assume that quality issues
can be traced to identifiable data sources and corrected through targeted interventions—an
assumption that breaks down in complex AI pipelines. Automation introduces account-
ability challenges, as decision-making shifts from humans to algorithms, requiring precise
governance mechanisms to assign responsibility [208,209,237].
Bias Amplification: Traditional data quality frameworks emphasize representational
accuracy—whether data correctly reflect real-world states. However, AI systems can per-
petuate and amplify biases present in training data, even when those data are “accurate”
in a technical sense. For instance, historical hiring data may accurately reflect past de-
cisions but encode discriminatory patterns that AI recruitment tools then reproduce at
scale [228,229]. This challenge requires governance frameworks to evaluate not only factual
accuracy but also fairness, equity, and social impact—dimensions that are often absent
from conventional standards.
Temporal Dynamics and Model Drift: Unlike static datasets used for one-time anal-
ysis, AI models operate in production environments where data distributions shift over
time. Seasonal patterns, market changes, demographic shifts, or external shocks (e.g.,
pandemics, regulatory changes) can render training data unrepresentative, degrading
model performance [258]. Governance frameworks must therefore incorporate continuous
monitoring, drift detection, and retraining protocols—requirements not emphasized in
traditional standards focused on periodic assessment.
Integrated governance frameworks link ethical acquisition, model validation, continu-
ous monitoring, and adaptive feedback throughout the AI lifecycle [207].
However, implementing such integrated frameworks faces significant organizational
barriers. A systematic review of data science projects identified 27 barriers grouped into
six clusters: people, data and technology, management, economic, project, and external
factors [212]. The most frequently cited included insufficient skills, lack of management
support, poor data quality, and misalignment between project goals and organizational
objectives. These findings show that governance failures are as much organizational and
cultural as they are technical—a reality that technical standards alone cannot resolve.
8.3. AI Ethics as an Integral Component of Data Quality
The integration of ethical considerations into data quality frameworks represents
one of the most significant paradigm shifts in the era of AI. Traditional data quality man-
agement focused primarily on technical accuracy and operational efficiency. In contrast,
contemporary AI governance recognizes that data quality cannot be divorced from ethical
principles such as fairness, accountability, transparency, and equity [227,233,240,259].
Bias and Fairness: Biased training data lead directly to biased algorithms, which in
turn produce discriminatory outcomes across healthcare, criminal justice, lending, hiring,
and other high-stakes domains [228,229,260]. The concept of “fairness” in AI contexts
is multifaceted, encompassing statistical parity (equal outcomes across groups), equal

Data 2025, 10, 201
22 of 40
opportunity (equal true positive rates), and individual fairness (treating similar individuals
similarly). Achieving any of these fairness criteria depends fundamentally on the quality,
representativeness, and balance of training data. Consequently, assessing and mitigating
bias is no longer an optional ethical enhancement but a core data quality requirement.
Accountability and Transparency: When AI systems make consequential decisions—
approving loans, diagnosing diseases, recommending sentences—stakeholders have a right
to understand how those decisions were reached. Data provenance, lineage, and quality
documentation become essential for accountability [257,259]. If a model produces a harmful
outcome, investigators must be able to trace the decision back through the algorithmic
pipeline to the underlying data, assess whether quality issues contributed to the failure,
and assign responsibility appropriately. Governance frameworks must therefore mandate
comprehensive metadata, audit trails, and transparency mechanisms—requirements that
extend well beyond traditional data quality assurance.
Privacy and Consent: Large-scale AI systems, particularly large language models
(LLMs), are trained on massive datasets often scraped from public sources without explicit
consent [227]. Data quality governance in this context must address not only technical ac-
curacy but also ethical sourcing, privacy preservation, and respect for data subjects’ rights.
Technologies such as federated learning and homomorphic encryption enable training on
distributed or encrypted data, embedding privacy-by-design into the technical architec-
ture [261]. These approaches demonstrate how governance is being increasingly integrated
directly into AI systems, rather than being treated as an external compliance layer.
Hallucinations and Misinformation: LLMs exemplify the risks of poor data quality
in AI contexts. Hallucinations—confident but factually incorrect outputs—arise from
inadequate governance during training and evaluation, often resulting from misuse, weak
security, or poor-quality inputs [262–267]. Misinformation, once generated by an AI system,
can propagate rapidly and at scale, causing social harm that far exceeds the original
data quality failure [268,269]. Governance frameworks must therefore integrate ethical
safeguards—such as adversarial testing, red-teaming, and continuous output monitoring—
to sustain trust and prevent harm [251].
Emerging governance frameworks explicitly incorporate these ethical dimensions.
For instance, fairness-aware machine learning techniques integrate bias detection and
mitigation directly into model training pipelines, using techniques such as adversarial
debiasing, reweighting, and fairness constraints [270]. Similarly, explainable AI (XAI)
methods provide interpretability mechanisms that enable stakeholders to interrogate model
decisions and identify data quality issues that contribute to erroneous outputs [271]. These
technical innovations represent a convergence of data quality assurance and ethical AI
governance, reflecting the recognition that technical and ethical dimensions are inseparable.
Figure 1 illustrates these interactions, showing governance as a mediator between
technical tools, organizational practices, and ethical safeguards. Large-language-model
behavior further highlights how data quality and governance jointly determine reliability
and trust [23,210,272]. In this integrated view, data quality is not merely a technical
prerequisite for AI but a sociotechnical construct that encompasses accuracy, fairness,
transparency, accountability, and societal impact.

Data 2025, 10, 201
23 of 40
Figure 1. Conceptual framework integrating data quality, governance, ethics, and AI tools for repro-
ducibility and trust. Light blue nodes represent core data quality management components; the green
node highlights reproducibility and trust as the collective outcome. Bidirectional arrows indicate
mutually reinforcing relationships, demonstrating that technical solutions alone are insufficient
without robust governance and ethical safeguards.
8.4. From “AI for Data Quality” to “Data Quality for AI”: A Bidirectional Relationship
The relationship between AI and data quality is bidirectional: AI systems both depend
on high-quality data and offer powerful tools for assuring data quality at scale. However,
current practices and market offerings remain imbalanced, with greater emphasis on “data
quality for AI” (ensuring inputs to models meet quality standards) than on “AI for data
quality” (using AI to detect and correct quality issues) [22].
AI for Data Quality: Advanced automated tools, including machine learning algo-
rithms, enable continuous monitoring, anomaly detection, and large-scale validation that
surpasses manual methods [113,154,184,273]. Multi-agent AI systems demonstrate the
potential for full automation, with “planner” and “executor” agents automatically gener-
ating and executing PySpark validation code from natural-language prompts, adapting
dynamically to evolving data sources.
Large Language Models (LLMs) extend this capability to semantic quality assessment.
LLMs can identify contextual anomalies in relational databases that rule-based methods
overlook, such as detecting implausible relationships, temporal inconsistencies, or domain-
specific violations [274]. OpenAI’s DaVinci model has demonstrated the capacity to assess
temporal, geographic, and technological coverage in datasets, reducing practitioner bias
and improving metadata completeness [275] These capabilities suggest that AI-driven
quality assurance may soon rival or exceed human expert judgment in many contexts.
However, adoption remains limited. A systematic review of 151 data quality tools
found that most focus on preparing data for AI rather than leveraging AI to improve
data quality, highlighting a gap between technological capability and market implementa-
tion. Barriers include user acceptance concerns (security, trust, transparency), insufficient
organizational skills, and management hesitancy to adopt AI-driven processes [22].
Data Quality for AI: Conversely, AI systems impose stringent quality requirements
on their training data. High-quality inputs are crucial for ensuring model accuracy, fair-
ness, robustness, and scalability [276] Models trained on flawed data produce unreliable
predictions, amplify biases, and degrade over time as data distributions shift. Ensuring
data quality for AI, therefore, requires:

Data 2025, 10, 201
24 of 40
•
Rigorous preprocessing, profiling, and cleansing to eliminate inaccuracies, duplicates,
and missing values [277]
•
Bias detection and mitigation at the data sourcing stage to prevent algorithmic dis-
crimination [278]
•
Continuous monitoring and retraining to address model drift and maintain represen-
tativeness [279,280]
•
Comprehensive metadata and provenance documentation to support explainability
and accountability [281]
The 1-10-100 rule—prevention costs $1, correction costs $10, failure costs $100—applies
with particular force in AI contexts, where the cost of failure can include not only financial
losses but also reputational damage, legal liability, and social harm [33,101].
AI-based frameworks can support this lifecycle through layered architectures, includ-
ing data ingestion, quality assessment (e.g., Isolation Forests, BERT for anomaly detection),
cleansing and correction (e.g., KNN imputation, LSTM for time series), and continuous
monitoring with feedback loops [282–285]. Advanced methods, such as the Denoising Self-
Attention Network (DSAN), leverage self-attention and multitask learning to impute mixed-
type tabular data, predicting substitutes for both numerical and categorical fields with
high accuracy Data fusion techniques integrate heterogeneous sources, thereby reducing
uncertainty and providing more comprehensive representations for model training [285].
Ultimately, sustainable AI governance depends on closing the loop between these two
directions. AI tools that improve data quality must themselves be trained on high-quality
data, validated for fairness and robustness, and monitored for drift and degradation. This
recursive relationship highlights that data quality and AI governance are not separate
concerns, but rather intertwined imperatives within the contemporary data ecosystem.
8.5. Synthesis: Toward Integrated AI-Era Data Quality Governance
The AI era demands a fundamental reconceptualization of data quality. Traditional
frameworks emphasizing accuracy, completeness, and consistency remain necessary but
insufficient. AI-era governance must additionally address algorithmic fairness, model
explainability, continuous monitoring, bias mitigation, and ethical accountability. These
requirements cannot be retrofitted onto legacy standards; instead, they must be integrated
systematically throughout the data and AI lifecycle.
Key principles for AI-era data quality governance include:
1.
Lifecycle Integration: Quality assurance must be embedded at every stage—from data
sourcing and preparation through model development, deployment, and continuous
monitoring—rather than treated as a pre-analytical step [286–291]
2.
Ethical Embeddedness: Fairness, transparency, and accountability are not external
compliance requirements but intrinsic quality dimensions that must be assessed,
measured, and continuously validated [292–301].
3.
Continuous Adaptation: AI systems operate in dynamic environments where data dis-
tributions shift and new risks emerge. Governance frameworks must incorporate feed-
back loops, drift detection, and iterative policy updates to remain effective [302–309].
4.
Sociotechnical Approach: Technology alone—even sophisticated AI-driven validation
systems—cannot resolve governance challenges. Sustainable quality requires integra-
tion of technical solutions with organizational design, clear accountability structures,
adequate training, and committed leadership [309–311].
5.
Bidirectional Innovation: Organizations must leverage AI to improve data quality at
scale while simultaneously ensuring that AI systems themselves are trained, validated,
and monitored using high-quality, ethically sourced data [305,310,312,313].

Data 2025, 10, 201
25 of 40
The convergence of data quality management and AI ethics represents one of the
defining challenges and opportunities of the contemporary data landscape. Organizations
that successfully navigate this paradigm shift—by embedding ethical considerations into
technical quality frameworks, leveraging AI for continuous assurance, and maintaining
rigorous governance throughout the AI lifecycle—will achieve competitive advantages,
mitigate risks, and contribute to the development of trustworthy, socially beneficial AI
systems. Conversely, those that persist with outdated, compliance-focused approaches
risk algorithmic failures, regulatory penalties, reputational damage, and social harm—
consequences far exceeding the investments required for comprehensive, forward-looking.
9. Discussion
9.1. Synthesis of Literature: What Is Agreed upon, What Is Debated
This review confirms the persistence of inconsistencies in defining and applying data
quality dimensions across various sectors. Miller’s hierarchical model offers a promising
path by harmonizing terminology and adding new dimensions relevant to modern contexts
such as IoT and machine learning [62]. At the same time, AI and machine learning are
transforming governance by automating profiling, anomaly detection, and metadata man-
agement, reducing manual intervention and improving compliance. However, a systematic
review of 151 tools found that most focus on “data quality for AI,” while few exploit “AI
for data quality” [108], highlighting a gap between current market offerings and the need
for intelligent, automated DQM.
The FAIR principles—Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable—provide a
widely recognized foundation for transparent management [237]. Initially developed for
research data, these principles ensure that datasets are discoverable through rich metadata,
accessible with clear usage conditions, interoperable through standardized formats, and
reusable across different contexts. Applied not only to data but also to software, they ensure
reproducibility by making workflows, tools, and dependencies openly accessible [26,314].
FAIR should be viewed as a flexible, community-driven framework for creating “AI-ready”
digital objects that machines can process with minimal human intervention [238], under-
scoring that alignment with FAIR principles requires sustained organizational commitment
beyond technical implementation. [239] The broader reproducibility crisis has eroded trust
in science [315], prompting calls for open science interventions that emphasize transparency
in data practices to strengthen accountability [316]. Together, these findings position data
quality as integral to reproducibility, FAIR compliance, and ongoing scientific reform.
9.2. Emerging Trends and Lessons from Failures
Semantic-driven technologies, including ontologies and knowledge graphs, emphasize
semantics as a standalone dimension of data quality [20]. Ethical principles are increas-
ingly embedded directly in AI systems through privacy-preserving algorithms such as
federated learning and homomorphic encryption, which minimize risks by training or com-
puting on distributed, encrypted data [207]. This reflects a shift toward privacy-by-design
architectures, making governance an integral part of technical systems.
Large Language Models (LLMs) extend this trend, enabling semantic-level assess-
ments of data quality. Seabra demonstrated that LLMs can identify contextual anomalies
in relational databases that are overlooked by rule-based methods [274,316]. Similarly,
OpenAI’s DaVinci model has demonstrated the capacity to assess temporal, geographic,
and technological coverage, thereby reducing practitioner bias. [317] Multi-agent frame-
works further automate the lifecycle, generating and refining PySpark validation scripts
with minimal human input [216]. While these advances promise efficiency, they also raise
ethical challenges. AI-driven governance must strike a balance between automation and

Data 2025, 10, 201
26 of 40
safeguards, such as fairness and explainability [76,117], as algorithmic decision-making
can amplify biases and erode accountability [257,259].
Failures provide further lessons. Poor timeliness, granularity, or completeness consis-
tently impair CRM analytics. For example, a study reported that 64% of customer data had
a timeliness score of ≤0.3, producing outdated segmentation and ineffective campaigns [21].
Such cases reinforce that sustainable progress depends on continuous monitoring, system-
atic validation, and robust governance. Regulatory penalties and reputational damage
highlight the cost of neglect [13]. These lessons show that innovation must be coupled with
organizational learning to avoid recurring pitfalls.
9.3. Research Gaps
Despite progress, key gaps remain. The organizational dimension of information
quality in public administration is underexplored, as governance structures, staff skills,
and administrative processes strongly influence reliability, but are mainly insufficiently
studied [28]. Promising theoretical tools, such as sixtuple information theory and rough
set approaches, are still confined to narrow domains, such as judicial documents [31], and
require testing in broader contexts (healthcare, publishing, administration).
Measurement standards also lack harmonization. The WHO’s Data Quality Review
toolkit [318] proposes a facility-level framework, but adoption remains uneven across
regions, while sector-specific standards remain fragmented. In healthcare, real-world data
often lack standardized definitions, which hinders analytics and research. Qualitative work
in Ethiopian public facilities reveals that inadequate training and infrastructure compromise
timeliness, completeness, and accuracy [124], underscoring persistent vulnerabilities in the
public sector.
Similarly, SMEs remain underexplored. A study of 85 UK SMEs found that deficits in
technical skills and resources limit the adoption of robust practices [125]. More compre-
hensive empirical research is needed to determine whether current frameworks effectively
support data-driven decision-making in resource-constrained settings.
9.4. Implications for Practitioners and Policymakers
For practitioners, embedding quality mechanisms directly into business process mod-
els offers a sustainable approach to governance. Validation and monitoring should be built
into workflows rather than treated as external add-ons [20]. Reusable “information quality
fragments” reduce modeling time, provide explicit checkpoints, and increase confidence,
while their validation by domain experts demonstrates feasibility [27].
For policymakers and standard setters, these insights underscore the importance
of explicitly validating data quality in process modeling guidelines to mitigate systemic
risks. Embedding FAIR principles—ensuring data are Findable, Accessible, Interoperable,
and Reusable—remains a practical pathway toward reproducibility and accountability in
research [237]. Incorporating FAIR principles into governance frameworks not only ensures
compliance with regulatory and ethical standards but also enhances the long-term value of
datasets by increasing usability [319].
10. Conclusions
This review demonstrates that data quality is a multidimensional concept that extends
beyond technical accuracy to include contextual, representational, and accessibility dimen-
sions, as well as emerging attributes such as governance and semantics. Its central contri-
bution has been to connect classic theoretical frameworks with real-world case studies and
contemporary challenges in governance, ethics, and artificial intelligence. Ensuring data

Data 2025, 10, 201
27 of 40
quality is therefore not only a technical task but also a strategic and socio-organizational
imperative for scientific reproducibility and organizational trust.
The literature consistently demonstrates that poor data quality undermines decision-
making, wastes resources, erodes trust, and yields harmful outcomes. Case studies from
finance, healthcare, logistics, and aerospace confirm the pervasive and costly consequences
of inadequate quality. Effective practices cannot rely solely on post-hoc cleaning; they
must embed validation and governance across the entire data lifecycle—from collection to
continuous monitoring and ethical oversight. Standards such as ISO 8000 and ISO 25012, as
well as newer hierarchical models, provide practical foundations; however, fragmentation
in terminology and uneven adoption persist.
Key challenges remain: the proliferation of heterogeneous data sources, the velocity
of big data, and entrenched organizational silos. While AI-driven validation tools and
governance frameworks offer promising solutions, cost–benefit trade-offs often prevent
systematic adoption.
For practitioners, high-quality data should be treated as a strategic asset. For re-
searchers and policymakers, stronger integration with data ethics and greater attention to
underexplored contexts, such as healthcare systems and SMEs, are urgently needed.
Finally, aligning practices with FAIR principles reinforces transparency, reproducibility,
and long-term societal impact.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, E.A.-O., F.G.-G. and I.A.-O.; methodology, E.A.-O., F.G.-
G. and I.A.-O.; formal analysis, F.G.-G. and I.A.-O.; investigation, M.G.-A. and L.G.-A.; resources,
E.A.-O.; data curation, M.G.-A. and L.G.-A.; writing—original draft preparation, M.G.-A. and L.G.-A.;
writing—review and editing, E.A.-O., F.G.-G., I.A.-O., M.G.-A. and L.G.-A.; visualization, M.G.-A.
and L.G.-A.; supervision, F.G.-G. and I.A.-O.; project administration, F.G.-G. and I.A.-O. All authors
have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Acknowledgments: In the first revision of this manuscript, the authors used Grammarly Professional
for grammar, spelling correction, and polishing the text, and ChatGPT version 5 for maintaining the
flow of the text. The authors have reviewed and edited all outputs and take full responsibility for the
content of this publication.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Abbreviations
The following abbreviations are used in this manuscript:
Abbreviation
Full Term
AI
Artificial Intelligence
BERT
Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers
BI
Business Intelligence
CLV
Customer Lifetime Value
CRM
Customer Relationship Management
DQA
Data Quality Assessment
DQI
Data Quality Index
DQM
Data Quality Management
DSAN
Denoising Self-Attention Network
DSS
Decision Support Systems
ECCMA
Electronic Commerce Code Management Association
FAIR
Findability, Accessibility, Interoperability, and Reusability
FAIR4RS
FAIR for Research Software
GDPR
General Data Protection Regulation

Data 2025, 10, 201
28 of 40
IoT
Internet of Things
ISO
International Organization for Standardization
KNN
K-Nearest Neighbors
LLMs
Large Language Models
LSTM
Long Short-Term Memory
NATO
North Atlantic Treaty Organization
NCS
NATO Codification System
RFM
Recency, Frequency, and Monetary
SaaS
Software as a Service
SMEs
Small and Medium-sized Enterprises
WHO
World Health Organization
References
1.
Bernardi, F.; Andrade Alves, D.; Crepaldi, N.Y.; Yamada, D.B.; Lima, V.; Costa Rijo, R.P.C.L. Data Quality in Health Research: A
Systematic Literature Review. medRxiv 2022, 2022, 22275804.
2.
Elahi,
E.
Data
Quality
in
Healthcare–Benefits,
Challenges,
and
Steps
for
Improvement.
Available
online:
https://dataladder.com/data-quality-in-healthcare-data-systems/ (accessed on 16 August 2024).
3.
Ali, S.M.; Naureen, F.; Noor, A.; Kamel Boulos, M.N.; Aamir, J.; Ishaq, M.; Anjum, N.; Ainsworth, J.; Rashid, A.; Majidulla, A.;
et al. Data Quality: A Negotiator between Paper-Based and Digital Records in Pakistan’s TB Control Program. Data 2018, 3, 27.
[CrossRef]
4.
Chen, H.; Hailey, D.; Wang, N.; Yu, P. A Review of Data Quality Assessment Methods for Public Health Information Systems. Int.
J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2014, 11, 5170–5207. [CrossRef]
5.
ISO 8000-1:2022(en); Data Quality—Part 1: Overview. International Organization for Standardization (ISO): Geneva, Switzerland,
2022. Available online: https://www.iso.org/obp/ui/#iso:std:iso:8000:-1:ed-1:v1:en (accessed on 20 August 2025).
6.
ECCMA. What Is ISO 8000? Available online: https://eccma.org/what-is-iso-8000/ (accessed on 20 August 2025).
7.
ISO 8000-1:2011; Data Quality—Part 1: Overview. International Organization for Standardization ISO: Geneva, Switzerland, 2011.
8.
ISO 8000-110:2009; Data Quality—Part 110: Master Data: Exchange of Characteristic Data: Syntax, Semantic Encoding, and
Conformance to Data Specification. International Organization for Standardization ISO: Geneva, Switzerland, 2009.
9.
ISO/IEC 25012:2008; Software Engineering—Software Product Quality Requirements and Evaluation (SQuaRE)—Data Quality
Model. ISO: Geneva, Switzerland, 2008. Available online: https://www.iso.org/standard/35736.html (accessed on 27 October
2025).
10.
Petrovi´c, M. Data Quality in Customer Relationship Management (CRM): Literature Review. Strateg. Manag. 2020, 25, 40–47.
[CrossRef]
11.
Henderson, D.; Earley, S.; Sykora, E.; Smith, E. DAMA-DMBOOK Data Management Body of Knowledge, 2nd ed.; DAMA Interna-
tional: Basking Ridge, NJ, USA, 2017.
12.
Alshawi, S.; Missi, F.; Irani, Z. Organisational, Technical and Data Quality Factors in CRM Adoption—SMEs Perspective. Ind.
Mark. Manag. 2011, 40, 376–383. [CrossRef]
13.
Henderson, D.; Earley, S.; Sykora, E.; Smith, E. (Eds.) Data Quality. In DAMA-DMBOOK Data Management Body of Knowledge;
DAMA International: Basking Ridge, NJ, USA, 2017; pp. 551–611.
14.
Strong, D.M.; Lee, Y.W.; Wang, R.Y. Data Quality in Context. Commun. ACM 1997, 40, 103–110. [CrossRef]
15.
Wang, R.Y.; Strong, D.M. Beyond Accuracy: What Data Quality Means to Data Consumers. J. Manag. Inf. Syst. 1996, 12, 5–33.
[CrossRef]
16.
Benson, P. NATO Codification System as the Foundation for ISO 8000, the International Standard for Data Quality. Oil IT J. 2008,
1, 1–4.
17.
Pipino, L.L.; Lee, Y.W.; Wang, R.Y. Data Quality Assessment. Commun. ACM 2002, 45, 211–218. [CrossRef]
18.
Ehrlinger, L.; Wöß, W. A Survey of Data Quality Measurement and Monitoring Tools. Front. Big Data 2022, 5, 850611. [CrossRef]
19.
Haug, A.; Zachariassen, F.; van Liempd, D. The Costs of Poor Data Quality. J. Ind. Eng. Manag. 2011, 4, 168–193. [CrossRef]
20.
Vaknin, M.; Filipowska, A. Information Quality Framework for the Design and Validation of Data Flow Within Business Processes-Position
Paper; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2017; pp. 158–168. [CrossRef]
21.
Suh, Y. Exploring the Impact of Data Quality on Business Performance in CRM Systems for Home Appliance Business. IEEE
Access 2023, 11, 116076–116089. [CrossRef]
22.
Tamm, H.C.; Nikiforova, A. From Data Quality for AI to AI for Data Quality: A Systematic Review of Tools for AI-Augmented
Data Quality Management in Data Warehouses. arXiv 2025, arXiv:2406.10940.

Data 2025, 10, 201
29 of 40
23.
Bernardo, B.M.V.; Mamede, H.S.; Barroso, J.M.P.; dos Santos, V.M.P.D. Data Governance & Quality Management—Innovation and
Breakthroughs across Different Fields. J. Innov. Knowl. 2024, 9, 100598. [CrossRef]
24.
Nguyen, T.; Nguyen, H.-T.; Nguyen-Hoang, T.-A. Data Quality Management in Big Data: Strategies, Tools, and Educational
Implications. J. Parallel Distrib. Comput. 2025, 200, 105067. [CrossRef]
25.
Nicholson, N.; Negrao Carvalho, R.; Štotl, I. A FAIR Perspective on Data Quality Frameworks. Data 2025, 10, 136. [CrossRef]
26.
Lamprecht, A.-L.; Garcia, L.; Kuzak, M.; Martinez, C.; Arcila, R.; Martin Del Pico, E.; Dominguez Del Angel, V.; van de Sandt, S.;
Ison, J.; Martinez, P.A.; et al. Towards FAIR Principles for Research Software. Data Sci. 2020, 3, 37–59. [CrossRef]
27.
Lopes, C.S.; Silveira, D.S.D.; Araujo, J. Business Processes Fragments to Promote Information Quality. Int. J. Qual. Reliab. Manag.
2021, 38, 1880–1901. [CrossRef]
28.
Oliychenko, I.; Ditkovska, M. Improving Information Quality in E-Government of Ukraine. Electron. Gov. Int. J. 2023, 19, 146.
[CrossRef]
29.
Xu, J.; Tang, J.; Ma, X.; Xu, B.; Shen, Y.; Qiao, Y. Objective Information Theory: A Sextuple Model and 9 Kinds of Metrics. Comput.
Sci. Math. 2014, 2014, 793–802.
30.
Lian, H.; He, T.; Qin, Z.; Li, H.; Liu, J. Research on the Information Quality Measurement of Judicial Documents. In Proceedings
of the 2018 IEEE International Conference on Software Quality, Reliability and Security Companion (QRS-C), Lisbon, Portugal,
16–20 July 2018; pp. 177–181.
31.
Chue Hong, N.P.; Aragon, S.; Hettrick, S.; Jay, C. The Future of Research Software Is the Future of Research. Patterns 2025, 6,
101322. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32.
Even, A.; Shankaranarayanan, G.; Berger, P.D. Evaluating a Model for Cost-Effective Data Quality Management in a Real-World
CRM Setting. Decis. Support Syst. 2010, 50, 152–163. [CrossRef]
33.
Foote, K. The Impact of Poor Data Quality (and How to Fix It). Available online: https://www.dataversity.net/the-impact-of-
poor-data-quality-and-how-to-fix-it/ (accessed on 26 August 2024).
34.
Payton, F.C.; Zahay, D. Understanding Why Marketing Does Not Use the Corporate Data Warehouse for CRM Applications. J.
Database Mark. Cust. Strategy Manag. 2003, 10, 315–326. [CrossRef]
35.
Bidlack, C.; Wellman, M.P. Exceptional Data Quality Using Intelligent Matching and Retrieval. AI Mag. 2010, 31, 65–73. [CrossRef]
36.
Schäffer, T.; Beckmann, H. Trendstudie Stammdatenqualität 2013: Erhebung der Aktuellen Situation zur Stammdatenqualität in Un-
ternehmen und Daraus Abgeleitete Trends [Trend StudyMaster Data Quality 2013: Inquiry of the Current Situation of Master Data Quality
in Companies and Derived Trends]; Steinbeis-Edition: Stuttgart, Germany, 2014.
37.
Fisher, C.W.; Lauria, E.J.M.; Matheus, C.C. An Accuracy Metric. J. Data Inf. Qual. 2009, 1, 1–21. [CrossRef]
38.
Kelka, H. Supply Chain Resilience Navigating Disruptions Through Strategic Inventory Management. Bachelor’s Thesis,
Metropolia University of Applied Sciences, Helsinki, Finland, 2024.
39.
Al-Harrasi, A.S.; Adarbah, H.Y.; Al-Badi, A.H.; Shaikh, A.K.; Al-Shihi, H.; Al-Barrak, A. Exploring the Adoption of Big Data
Analytics in the Oil and Gas Industry: A Case Study. J. Bus. Commun. Technol. 2024, 3, 1–16. [CrossRef]
40.
Joseph, M.; Kumar, D.P.; Keerthana, J.K. Stock Market Analysis and Portfolio Management. In Proceedings of the 2024 11th
International Conference on Reliability, Infocom Technologies and Optimization (Trends and Future Directions) (ICRITO), Noida,
India, 14–15 March 2024; pp. 1–6. [CrossRef]
41.
Purohit, P.; Al Nuaimi, F.; Nakkolakkal, S. Data Governance, Privacy, Data Sharing Challenges. In Proceedings of the SPE Gas &
Oil Technology Showcase and Conference, Dubai, United Arab Emirates, 7–9 May 2024. [CrossRef]
42.
UTradeAlgos. The Importance of Real-Time Data in Algo Trading Software. Available online: https://utradealgos.com/blog/the-
importance-of-real-time-data-in-algo-trading-software/ (accessed on 27 August 2024).
43.
Antwi, B.O.; Adelakun, B.O.; Eziefule, A.O. Transforming Financial Reporting with AI: Enhancing Accuracy and Timeliness. Int.
J. Adv. Econ. 2024, 6, 205–223. [CrossRef]
44.
Nwaimo, C.S.; Adegbola, A.E.; Adegbola, M.D.; Adeusi, K.B. Evaluating the Role of Big Data Analytics in Enhancing Accuracy
and Efficiency in Accounting: A Critical Review. Financ. Account. Res. J. 2024, 6, 877–892. [CrossRef]
45.
Judijanto, L.; Edtiyarsih, D.D. The Effect of Company Policy, Legal Compliance, and Information Technology on Audit Report
Accuracy in the Textile Industry in Tangerang. West Sci. Account. Financ. 2024, 2, 287–298. [CrossRef]
46.
Ehsani-Moghaddam, B.; Martin, K.; Queenan, J.A. Data Quality in Healthcare: A Report of Practical Experience with the Canadian
Primary Care Sentinel Surveillance Network Data. Health Inf. Manag. J. 2021, 50, 88–92. [CrossRef]
47.
Lorence, D. Measuring Disparities in Information Capture Timeliness Across Healthcare Settings: Effects on Data Quality. J. Med.
Syst. 2003, 27, 425–433. [CrossRef]
48.
Mashoufi, M.; Ayatollahi, H.; Khorasani-Zavareh, D.; Talebi Azad Boni, T. Data Quality in Health Care: Main Concepts and
Assessment Methodologies. Methods Inf. Med. 2023, 62, 005–018. [CrossRef]
49.
Wager, K.A.; Schaffner, M.J.; Foulois, B.; Swanson Kazley, A.; Parker, C.; Walo, H. Comparison of the Quality and Timeliness of
Vital Signs Data Using Three Different Data-Entry Devices. CIN Comput. Inform. Nurs. 2010, 28, 205–212. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Data 2025, 10, 201
30 of 40
50.
Alzghoul, A.; Khaddam, A.A.; Abousweilem, F.; Irtaimeh, H.J.; Alshaar, Q. How Business Intelligence Capability Impacts
Decision-Making Speed, Comprehensiveness, and Firm Performance. Inf. Dev. 2024, 40, 220–233. [CrossRef]
51.
Kusumawardhani, F.K.; Ratmono, D.; Wibowo, S.T.; Darsono, D.; Widyatmoko, S.; Rokhman, N. The Impact of Digitalization in
Accounting Systems on Information Quality, Cost Reduction and Decision Making: Evidence from SMEs. Int. J. Data Netw. Sci.
2024, 8, 1111–1116. [CrossRef]
52.
GOV.UK. Hidden Costs of Poor Data Quality Tackling Data Quality Saves Money and Reduces Risk; Government Data Quality Hub:
London, UK, 2021.
53.
Sattler, K.-U. Data Quality Dimensions. In Encyclopedia of Database Systems; Springer: New York, NY, USA, 2016; pp. 1–5.
[CrossRef]
54.
Enterprise Big Data Framework. Understanding Data Quality: Ensuring Accuracy, Reliability, and Consistency. Available online:
https://www.bigdataframework.org/knowledge/understanding-data-quality/ (accessed on 27 August 2024).
55.
Chen, B. What is Data Relevance? Definition, Examples, and Best Practices. Available online: https://www.metaplane.dev/blog/
data-relevance-definition-examples (accessed on 27 August 2024).
56.
IBM. What Is Data Quality? Available online: https://www.ibm.com/think/topics/data-quality (accessed on 25 October 2025).
57.
Okembo, C.; Morales, J.; Lemmen, C.; Zevenbergen, J.; Kuria, D. A Land Administration Data Exchange and Interoperability
Framework for Kenya and Its Significance to the Sustainable Development Goals. Land 2024, 13, 435. [CrossRef]
58.
Bammidi, T.; Gutta, L.; Kotagiri, A.; Samayamantri, L.; Vaddy, R. The Crucial Role of Data Quality in Automated Decision-Making
Systems. Int. J. Manag. Educ. Sustain. Dev. 2024, 7, 1–22.
59.
Yandrapalli, V. AI-Powered Data Governance: A Cutting-Edge Method for Ensuring Data Quality for Machine Learning
Applications. In Proceedings of the 2024 Second International Conference on Emerging Trends in Information Technology and
Engineering (ICETITE), Vellore, India, 22–23 February 2024; pp. 1–6. [CrossRef]
60.
Van Iddekinge, C.H.; Ployhart, R.E. Developments in the Criterion–related Validation of Selection Procedures: A Critical Review
and Recommendations for Practice. Pers. Psychol. 2008, 61, 871–925. [CrossRef]
61.
Redman, T.C. Bad Data Costs the U.S. $3 Trillion per Year. Available online: https://hbr.org/2016/09/bad-data-costs-the-u-s-3-
trillion-per-year (accessed on 14 September 2025).
62.
Miller, R.; Whelan, H.; Chrubasik, M.; Whittaker, D.; Duncan, P.; Gregório, J. A Framework for Current and New Data Quality
Dimensions: An Overview. Data 2024, 9, 151. [CrossRef]
63.
Gartner, Inc. Data Quality: Why It Matters and How to Achieve It. Available online: https://www.gartner.com/en/data-
analytics/topics/data-quality (accessed on 20 August 2025).
64.
Albrecht, R.; Overbeek, S.; van de Weerd, I. Designing a Data Quality Management Framework for CRM Platform Delivery and
Consultancy. SN Comput. Sci. 2023, 4, 742. [CrossRef]
65.
Nilashi, M.; Abumalloh, R.A.; Ahmadi, H.; Samad, S.; Alrizq, M.; Abosaq, H.; Alghamdi, A. The Nexus Between Quality of
Customer Relationship Management Systems and Customers’ Satisfaction: Evidence from Online Customers’ Reviews. Heliyon
2023, 9, e21828. [CrossRef]
66.
Nikiforova, A. Open Data Quality Evaluation: A Comparative Analysis of Open Data in Latvia. Balt. J. Mod. Comput. 2018, 6,
363–386. [CrossRef]
67.
Southekal, P. Data Quality: Empowering Businesses with Analytics and AI; John Wiley & Sons: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2023.
68.
Cornford, S.L.; Wheeler, A.; Feather, M.S.; Plante, J.F. Assurance Equations: A Cost and Criticality Model for Optimizing Quality
Assurance Surveillance. In Proceedings of the 2022 IEEE Aerospace Conference (AERO), Big Sky, MT, USA, 5–12 March 2022;
pp. 1–13. [CrossRef]
69.
Moore, B. How Bad Data Is Ruining Personalized Customer Experiences–And What to Do About It.
Available on-
line: https://www.infoverity.com/en/blog/how-bad-data-is-ruining-personalized-customer-experiences-and-what-to-do-about-
it/ (accessed on 7 November 2025).
70.
Theodorakopoulos, L.; Theodoropoulou, A. Leveraging Big Data Analytics for Understanding Consumer Behavior in Digital
Marketing: A Systematic Review. Hum. Behav. Emerg. Technol. 2024, 2024, 3641502. [CrossRef]
71.
Alves Gomes, M.; Meisen, T. A Review on Customer Segmentation Methods for Personalized Customer Targeting in E-Commerce
Use Cases. Inf. Syst. E-Bus. Manag. 2023, 21, 527–570. [CrossRef]
72.
Fu, Q.; Nicholson, G.L.; Easton, J.M. Understanding Data Quality in a Data-Driven Industry Context: Insights from the
Fundamentals. J. Ind. Inf. Integr. 2024, 42, 100729. [CrossRef]
73.
Sun, B. Data-Driven Personalized Marketing Strategy Optimization Based on User Behavior Modeling and Predictive Analytics:
Sustainable Market Segmentation and Targeting. PLoS ONE 2025, 20, e0328151. [CrossRef]
74.
The Information Difference Ltd.; Experian. The Data Quality Landscape–Q1 2023; The Information Difference Ltd.: York, UK, 2023.
75.
Validity. The State of CRM Data Management in 2024; Validity: Boston, MA, USA, 2024.
76.
Rahm, E.; Do, H. Data Cleaning: Problems and Current Approaches. IEEE Data Eng. Bull. 2000, 23, 3–14.
77.
Nagle, T.; Redman, T.C.; Sammon, D. Only 3% of Companies’ Data Meets Basic Quality Standards. Harv. Bus. Rev. 2017, 95, 2–5.

Data 2025, 10, 201
31 of 40
78.
Ahani, A.; Rahim, N.Z.A.; Nilashi, M. Forecasting Social CRM Adoption in SMEs: A Combined SEM-Neural Network Method.
Comput. Hum. Behav. 2017, 75, 560–578. [CrossRef]
79.
Delone, W.H.; McLean, E.R. The DeLone and McLean Model of Information Systems Success: A Ten-Year Update. J. Manag. Inf.
Syst. 2003, 19, 9–30. [CrossRef]
80.
Azeroual, O.; Saake, G.; Abuosba, M.; Schöpfel, J. Data Quality as a Critical Success Factor for User Acceptance of Research
Information Systems. Data 2020, 5, 35. [CrossRef]
81.
Redman, T.C. To Improve Data Quality, Start at the Source.
Harv.
Bussiness Rev.
2020.
Available online:
https://hbr.org/2020/02/to-improve-data-quality-start-at-the-source (accessed on 27 July 2025).
82.
Gatzert, N. The Impact of Corporate Reputation and Reputation Damaging Events on Financial Performance: Empirical Evidence
from the Literature. Eur. Manag. J. 2015, 33, 485–499. [CrossRef]
83.
Peña-García, N.; Losada-Otálora, M.; Auza, D.P.; Cruz, M.P. Reviews, Trust, and Customer Experience in Online Marketplaces:
The Case of Mercado Libre Colombia. Front. Commun. 2024, 9, 1460321. [CrossRef]
84.
Rushing, B.; Xu, S.; Fairman, A. From Breach to Bias: Measuring Reputation Value and Trust Recovery after Cyber Incidents in
Critical Infrastructure. Int. J. Crit. Infrastruct. Prot. 2025, 50, 100787. [CrossRef]
85.
Açikgöz, F.Y.; Kayaku¸s, M.; Zăbavă, B.-S, .; Kabas, O. Brand Reputation and Trust: The Impact on Customer Satisfaction and
Loyalty for the Hewlett-Packard Brand. Sustainability 2024, 16, 9681. [CrossRef]
86.
Nuortimo, K.; Harkonen, J.; Breznik, K. Exploring Corporate Reputation and Crisis Communication. J. Mark. Anal. 2024, 2024,
1–22. [CrossRef]
87.
Nagalakshmi, M.; Sai Sri Charan, Y.; Farooq, B.; Gaur, S.; Saxena, R.; Soni, D. The Role of Brand Image in Strategy. Adv. Consum.
Res. 2025, 2, 623–626.
88.
Barakat Ali, M.A. The Effect of Firm’s Brand Reputation on Customer Loyalty and Customer Word of Mouth: The Mediating
Role of Customer Satisfaction and Customer Trust. Int. Bus. Res. 2022, 15, 30. [CrossRef]
89.
La, S.; Choi, B. The Role of Customer Affection and Trust in Loyalty Rebuilding after Service Failure and Recovery. Serv. Ind. J.
2012, 32, 105–125. [CrossRef]
90.
McCance, L. Fixing the Foundation: The State of Marketing Data Quality 2025; Adverity: Vienna, Austria, 2025. Available online:
https://www.adverity.com/state-of-play-research-data-quality-2025 (accessed on 21 July 2025).
91.
Zhou, Y.; Shi, J.; Stein, R.; Liu, X.; Baldassano, R.N.; Forrest, C.B.; Chen, Y.; Huang, J. Missing Data Matter: An Empirical
Evaluation of the Impacts of Missing EHR Data in Comparative Effectiveness Research. J. Am. Med. Inf. Assoc 2023, 30, 1246–1256.
[CrossRef]
92.
Lewis, A.E.; Weiskopf, N.; Abrams, Z.B.; Foraker, R.; Lai, A.M.; Payne, P.R.O.; Gupta, A. Electronic Health Record Data Quality
Assessment and Tools: A Systematic Review. J. Am. Med. Inf. Assoc. 2023, 30, 1730–1740. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
93.
Heilbroner, S.P.; Carter, C.; Vidmar, D.M.; Mueller, E.T.; Stumpe, M.C.; Miotto, R. A Self-Supervised Framework for Laboratory
Data Imputation in Electronic Health Records. Commun. Med. 2025, 5, 251. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
94.
Kumar, P.; Gupta, V. Ai-Driven Market Analysis and Business Intelligence. Int. J. Res. Manag. 2024, 6, 252–260. [CrossRef]
95.
European Securities and Market Authority. 2024 Report on Quality and Use of Data; European Securities and Market Authority:
Paris, France, 2024.
96.
Harish, A. When NASA Lost a Spacecraft Due to a Metric Math Mistake. Available online: https://www.simscale.com/blog/nasa-
mars-climate-orbiter-metric/ (accessed on 6 November 2025).
97.
Euler, E.A.; Jolly, S.; Curtis, H.H. The Failures of the Mars Climate Orbiter and Mars Polar Lander: A Perspective from the People
Involved (Paper AAS 01-074). In Proceedings of the 44th Annual American Astronautical Society Guidance, Navigation, and
Control Conference, Harbin, China, 5–7 August 2022; American Astronautical Society: Breckenridge, CO, USA, 2001; pp. 2–22.
98.
Abdullah, F. A Case Study on the Mars Climate Orbiter and Mars Polar Lander Failures: What Is the Cost of Underestimating
Testing. In Zenodo; Zenodo: Geneva, Switzerland, 2025.
99.
NASA Tangles with the Metric System. Science 1999, 286, 2241. [CrossRef]
100. Reichhardt, T. NASA Reworks Its Sums after Mars Fiasco. Nature 1999, 401, 517. [CrossRef]
101. Davidson, N. The Cost of Poor Data Quality on Business Operations. Available online: https://lakefs.io/blog/poor-data-quality-
business-costs/ (accessed on 26 August 2024).
102. Yackel, R. The Impact of Bad Data: A Case Study on Unity. Available online: https://www.ibm.com/think/insights/observability-
data-benefits (accessed on 6 November 2025).
103. Xie, J.; Sun, L.; Zhao, Y.F. On the Data Quality and Imbalance in Machine Learning-Based Design and Manufacturing—A
Systematic Review. Engineering 2025, 45, 105–131. [CrossRef]
104. U.S. Government Accountability Office. Criminal History Records: Additional Actions Could Enhance the Completeness of Records Used
for Employment-Related Background Checks; GAO: Washington, DC, USA, 2015.
105. Lageson, S.; Stewart, R. The Problem with Criminal Records: Discrepancies between State Reports and Private–sector Background
Checks. Criminology 2024, 62, 5–34. [CrossRef]

Data 2025, 10, 201
32 of 40
106. Goggins, B.; DeBacco, D. Survey of State Criminal History Information Systems, 2020; Bureau of Justice Statistics: Washington, DC,
USA, 2022.
107. Bureau of Justice Statistics. FY 2023 National Criminal History Improvement Program (NCHIP); Bureau of Justice Statistics: Washing-
ton, DC, USA, 2023.
108. Wand, Y.; Wang, R. Anchoring Data Quality Dimensions in Ontological Foundations. Commun. ACM 1996, 39, 86–95. [CrossRef]
109. LaValle, C.R.; Haas, S.M.; Nolan, J.J. Testing the Validity of Demonstrated Imputation Methods on Longitudinal NIBRS Data; West
Virginia Criminal Justice Statistical Analysis Center: Charleston, WV, USA, 2014.
110. Prescott, J.J.; Starr, S.B. Expungement of Criminal Convictions: An Empirical Study. Harv. Law Rev. 2020, 133, 2460–2550.
[CrossRef]
111. Redman, T. Data Driven: Profiting from Your Most Important Business Asset; Redman, T., Ed.; Harvard Business Review Press:
Cambridge, MA, USA, 2013.
112. Strom, K.J.; Smith, E.L. The Future of Crime Data. Criminol. Public Policy 2017, 16, 1027–1048. [CrossRef]
113. Mahendra, P.; Doshi, P.; Verma, A.; Shrivastava, S. A Comprehensive Review of AI and ML in Data Governance and Data Quality.
In Proceedings of the 2025 3rd International Conference on Inventive Computing and Informatics (ICICI), Bangalore, India, 4–6
June 2025; pp. 1–6. [CrossRef]
114. Inmon, W.H. Building the Data Warehouse, 3rd ed.; John Wiley & Sons: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2005.
115. KPMG. Managing the Data Challenge in Banking; KPMG: London, UK, 2014.
116. Jeleel-Ojuade, A. The Role of Information Silos: An Analysis of How the Categorization of Information Creates Silos within
Financial Institutions, Hindering Effective Communication and Collaboration. SSRN Electron. J. 2024, 2014, 4881342. [CrossRef]
117. European Central Bank (SSM). Guide on Effective Risk Data Aggregation and Risk Reporting; European Central Bank (SSM): Frankfurt,
Germany, 2024.
118. Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. Principles for Effective Risk Data Aggregation and Risk Reporting (BCBS 239); Bank for
International Settlements: Basel, Switzerland, 2013.
119. Dehghani, Z. Data Mesh: Delivering Data-Driven Value at Scale; O’Reilly Media: Sebastopol, CA, USA, 2022.
120. Capirossi, J.; Rabier, P. An Enterprise Architecture and Data Quality Framework; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2013;
pp. 67–79. [CrossRef]
121. Taleb, I.; Serhani, M.A.; Bouhaddioui, C.; Dssouli, R. Big Data Quality Framework: A Holistic Approach to Continuous Quality
Management. J. Big Data 2021, 8, 76. [CrossRef]
122. Alaqla, M.F. The Impact of IT Governance and Administrative Information Quality on Decision-Making in the Banking Sector.
Corp. Gov. Organ. Behav. Rev. 2023, 7, 171–182. [CrossRef]
123. Weill, P.; Ross, J. IT Governance: How Top Performers Manage IT Decision Rights for Superior Results; Harvard Business School Press:
Cambridge, MA, USA, 2004.
124. Khatri, V.; Brown, C.V. Designing Data Governance. Commun. ACM 2010, 53, 148–152. [CrossRef]
125. Storey, V.C.; Dewan, R.M.; Freimer, M. Data Quality: Setting Organizational Policies. Decis. Support Syst. 2012, 54, 434–442.
[CrossRef]
126. Yang, Y. Applications and Challenges of Big Data in Market Analytics. Trans. Econ. Bus. Manag. Res. 2024, 9, 450–458. [CrossRef]
127. Gomez-Uribe, C.A.; Hunt, N. The Netflix Recommender System. ACM Trans. Manag. Inf. Syst. 2016, 6, 1–19. [CrossRef]
128. Pajkovic, N. Algorithms and Taste-Making: Exposing the Netflix Recommender System’s Operational Logics. Converg. Int. J. Res.
New Media Technol. 2022, 28, 214–235. [CrossRef]
129. Gerber, C. A Consumer Perspective on Netflix’s Recommender System. A Qualitative Analysis. Master’s Thesis, Erasmus
University Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 2021.
130. Dutta, A. Personalized Content Recommendation Impact on User Engagement of Netflix. Int. J. Res. Publ. Rev. 2025, 6,
10889–10892.
131. Kahn, M.G.; Raebel, M.A.; Glanz, J.M.; Riedlinger, K.; Steiner, J.F. A Pragmatic Framework for Single-Site and Multisite Data
Quality Assessment in Electronic Health Record-Based Clinical Research. Med Care 2012, 50, S21–S29. [CrossRef]
132. Daniel, C.; Kalra, D. Clinical Research Informatics: Contributions from 2018. Yearb Med. Inf. 2019, 28, 203–205. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
133. Qualls, L.G.; Phillips, T.A.; Hammill, B.G.; Topping, J.; Louzao, D.M.; Brown, J.S.; Curtis, L.H.; Marsolo, K. Evaluating
Foundational Data Quality in the National Patient-Centered Clinical Research Network (PCORnet®). eGEMs (Gener. Evid.
Methods Improv. Patient Outcomes) 2018, 6, 3. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
134. Daniel Boie, S.; Meyer-Eschenbach, F.; Schreiber, F.; Giesa, N.; Barrenetxea, J.; Guinemer, C.; Haufe, S.; Krämer, M.; Brunecker, P.;
Prasser, F.; et al. A Scalable Approach for Critical Care Data Extraction and Analysis in an Academic Medical Center. Int. J. Med.
Inf. 2024, 192, 105611. [CrossRef]
135. Ozonze, O.; Scott, P.J.; Hopgood, A.A. Automating Electronic Health Record Data Quality Assessment. J. Med. Syst. 2023, 47, 23.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

Data 2025, 10, 201
33 of 40
136. WHO. Data Quality Assurance (DQA) Toolkit; WHO: Geneva, Switzerland, 2022.
137. European Medicines Agency. Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use (CHMP). Data Quality Framework for EU Medicines
Regulation: 4 Application to Real-World Data; European Medicines Agency: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2024.
138. Hibbert, P.D.; Stewart, S.; Wiles, L.K.; Braithwaite, J.; Runciman, W.B.; Thomas, M.J.W. Improving Patient Safety Governance and
Systems through Learning from Successes and Failures: Qualitative Surveys and Interviews with International Experts. Int. J.
Qual. Health Care 2023, 35. [CrossRef]
139. Oktaviana, R.S.; Handayani, P.W.; Hidayanto, A.N.; Siswanto, B.B. Healthcare Data Governance Assessment Based on Hospital
Management Perspectives. Int. J. Inf. Manag. Data Insights 2025, 5, 100342. [CrossRef]
140. Lighterness, A.; Adcock, M.; Scanlon, L.A.; Price, G. Data Quality–Driven Improvement in Health Care: Systematic Literature
Review. J. Med. Internet Res. 2024, 26, e57615. [CrossRef]
141. Payne, A.; Frow, P. Relationship Marketing: Looking Backwards towards the Future. J. Serv. Mark. 2017, 31, 11–15. [CrossRef]
142. Choudhury, M.M.; Harrigan, P. CRM to Social CRM: The Integration of New Technologies into Customer Relationship Manage-
ment. J. Strateg. Mark. 2014, 22, 149–176. [CrossRef]
143. Becker, J.U.; Greve, G.; Albers, S. The Impact of Technological and Organizational Implementation of CRM on Customer
Acquisition, Maintenance, and Retention. Int. J. Res. Mark. 2009, 26, 207–215. [CrossRef]
144. Shum, P.; Bove, L.; Auh, S. Employees’ Affective Commitment to Change. Eur. J. Mark. 2008, 42, 1346–1371. [CrossRef]
145. Adane, A.; Adege, T.M.; Ahmed, M.M.; Anteneh, H.A.; Ayalew, E.S.; Berhanu, D.; Berhanu, N.; Getnet, M.; Bishaw, T.; Busza, J.;
et al. Exploring Data Quality and Use of the Routine Health Information System in Ethiopia: A Mixed-Methods Study. BMJ Open
2021, 11, e050356. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
146. Tilahun, H.; Abate, B.; Belay, H.; Gebeyehu, A.; Ahmed, M.; Simanesew, A.; Ayele, W.; Mohammedsanni, A.; Knittel, B.; Wondarad,
Y. Drivers and Barriers to Improved Data Quality and Data-Use Practices: An Interpretative Qualitative Study in Addis Ababa,
Ethiopia. Glob. Health Sci. Pract. 2022, 10 (Suppl. 1), e2100689. [CrossRef]
147. Tolera, A.; Firdisa, D.; Roba, H.S.; Motuma, A.; Kitesa, M.; Abaerei, A.A. Barriers to Healthcare Data Quality and Recommenda-
tions in Public Health Facilities in Dire Dawa City Administration, Eastern Ethiopia: A Qualitative Study. Front. Digit. Health
2024, 6, 1261031. [CrossRef]
148. Gazi, M.A.I.; Al Mamun, A.; Al Masud, A.; Senathirajah, A.R.B.S.; Rahman, T. The Relationship between CRM, Knowledge
Management, Organization Commitment, Customer Profitability and Customer Loyalty in Telecommunication Industry: The
Mediating Role of Customer Satisfaction and the Moderating Role of Brand Image. J. Open Innov. Technol. Mark. Complex. 2024, 10,
100227. [CrossRef]
149. Lee, Y.-C.; Wang, Y.-C.; Lu, S.-C.; Hsieh, Y.-F.; Chien, C.-H.; Tsai, S.-B.; Dong, W. An Empirical Research on Customer Satisfaction
Study: A Consideration of Different Levels of Performance. Springerplus 2016, 5, 1577. [CrossRef]
150. Guerola-Navarro, V.; Oltra-Badenes, R.; Gil-Gomez, H.; Gil-Gomez, J.A. Research Model for Measuring the Impact of Customer
Relationship Management (CRM) on Performance Indicators. Econ. Res.-Ekon. Istraživanja 2021, 34, 2669–2691. [CrossRef]
151. Eklof, J.; Podkorytova, O.; Malova, A. Linking Customer Satisfaction with Financial Performance: An Empirical Study of
Scandinavian Banks. Total Qual. Manag. Bus. Excell. 2020, 31, 1684–1702. [CrossRef]
152. Prasad, A. Impact of Poor Data Quality on Business Performance: Challenges, Costs, and Solutions. SSRN Electron. J. 2024.
Available online: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4843991 (accessed on 29 July 2025). [CrossRef]
153. Haverila, M.; Haverila, K.C.; Mohiuddin, M.; Su, Z. The Impact of Quality of Big Data Marketing Analytics (BDMA) on the
Market and Financial Performance. J. Glob. Inf. Manag. 2022, 30, 1–21. [CrossRef]
154. Redyuk, S.; Kaoudi, Z.; Markl, V.; Schelter, S. Automating Data Quality Validation for Dynamic Data Ingestion. In Proceedings of
the 24th International Conference on Extending Database Technology, EDBT’21, Nicosia, Cyprus, 23–26 March 2021; pp. 61–72.
155. Syed, R.; Eden, R.; Makasi, T.; Chukwudi, I.; Mamudu, A.; Kamalpour, M.; Kapugama Geeganage, D.; Sadeghianasl, S.; Leemans,
S.J.J.; Goel, K.; et al. Digital Health Data Quality Issues: Systematic Review. J. Med. Internet Res. 2023, 25, e42615. [CrossRef]
156. Barchard, K.A.; Freeman, A.J.; Ochoa, E.; Stephens, A.K. Comparing the Accuracy and Speed of Four Data-Checking Methods.
Behav. Res. Methods 2020, 52, 97–115. [CrossRef]
157. Perez-Castillo, R.; Carretero, A.G.; Caballero, I.; Rodriguez, M.; Piattini, M.; Mate, A.; Kim, S.; Lee, D. DAQUA-MASS: An ISO
8000-61 Based Data Quality Management Methodology for Sensor Data. Sensors 2018, 18, 3105. [CrossRef]
158. Silva, M.D.S.T.; Correia, S.É.N.; de A. Machado, P.; de Oliveira, V.M. Adoption of Information Technology in Public Administration:
A Focus on the Organizational Factors of a Brazilian Federal University. Teor. Prática Adm. 2020, 10, 138–153. [CrossRef]
159. Yukhno, A. Digital Transformation: Exploring Big Data Governance in Public Administration. Public Organ. Rev. 2024, 24, 335–349.
[CrossRef]
160. Cerrillo-Martínez, A.; Casadesús-de-Mingo, A. Data Governance for Public Transparency. El Prof. Inf. 2021, 30, e300402.
[CrossRef]
161. Lutsenko, K. Digitalisation of Public Administration: Challenges and Prospects. Health Leadersh. Qual. Life 2024, 3, 434. [CrossRef]
162. OECD. Developing Skills for Digital Government: A Review of Good Practices Across OECD Governments; OECD: Paris, France, 2024.

Data 2025, 10, 201
34 of 40
163. Tawil, A.-R.; Mohamed, M.; Schmoor, X.; Vlachos, K.; Haidar, D. Trends and Challenges Towards an Effective Data-Driven
Decision Making in UK SMEs: Case Studies and Lessons Learnt from the Analysis of 85 SMEs. arXiv 2023, arXiv:2305.15454.
[CrossRef]
164. Mohamed, M.; Weber, P. Trends of Digitalization and Adoption of Big Data & Analytics among UK SMEs: Analysis and Lessons
Drawn from a Case Study of 53 SMEs. In Proceedings of the 2020 IEEE International Conference on Engineering, Technology and
Innovation (ICE/ITMC), Cardiff, UK, 15–17 June 2020; pp. 1–6. [CrossRef]
165. Gates, S. 5 Examples of Bad Data Quality in Business—And How to Avoid Them. Available online: https://www.montecarlodata.com/
blog-bad-data-quality-examples/ (accessed on 26 August 2024).
166. Federal Trade Commission. Report to Congress Under Section 319 of the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act of 2003; Federal
Trade Commission: Washington, DC, USA, 2015.
167. Schroeder, P. US Consumer Bureau Fines Equifax $15 Million over Handling of Consumer Disputes. Reuters 2025. Avail-
able online: https://www.reuters.com/business/finance/us-consumer-bureau-fines-equifax-15-million-issues-fixing-consumer-
disputes-2025-01-17/ (accessed on 26 August 2024).
168. Mars Climate Orbiter Mishap Investigation Board. Mars Climate Orbiter Mishap Investigation Board Phase I Report; Mars Climate
Orbiter Mishap Investigation Board: Washington, DC, USA, 2019.
169. Data Ladder. Data Ladder Whitepapers|How Legacy Systems and Bad Data Quality Hinders a Digital Transformation Plan-Data
Ladder. Available online: https://dataladder.com/whitepapers/how-legacy-systems-and-bad-data-quality-hinders-a-digital-
transformation-plan/?imz_s=9nekd6omo7qd26qrf5hdkithi6%2F (accessed on 9 November 2025).
170. Deepak Veeravalli, S. Legacy System Modernization: Guidelines for Migrating from Legacy Systems to Salesforce: Address
Challenges and Implementing Best Practices with Reusable Integration Blueprints. Int. J. Comput. Sci. Inf. Technol. Res. 2022, 3,
133–144. [CrossRef]
171. Hüner, M.K.; Schierning, A.; Otto, B.; Österle, H. Product Data Quality in Supply Chains: The Case of Beiersdorf. Electron. Mark.
2011, 21, 141–154. [CrossRef]
172. Rigo, G.-E.; Pedron, C.D.; Caldeira, M.; De Araújo, C.C.S. CRM Adoption in a Higher Education Institution. J. Inf. Syst. Technol.
Manag. 2016, 13, 45–60. [CrossRef]
173. Weerts, D.J.; Ronca, J.M. Characteristics of Alumni Donors Who Volunteer at Their Alma Mater. Res. High. Educ. 2008, 49, 274–292.
[CrossRef]
174. Research Group of the Office of the Privacy Commissioner of Canada. The Age of Predictive Analytics: From Patterns to Predictions-
Office of the Privacy Commissioner of Canada; Research Group of the Office of the Privacy Commissioner of Canada: Gatineau, QC,
Canada, 2012.
175. Biemer, P.P. Data Quality and Inference Errors. In Big Data and Social Science Data Science Methods and Tools for Research and Practice;
Foster, I., Ghani, R., Jarmin, R., Kreuter, F., Lane, J., Eds.; CRC: Boca Raton, FL, USA, 2020.
176. Butler, D. When Google Got Flu Wrong. Nature 2013, 494, 155–156. [CrossRef]
177. Lazer, D.; Kennedy, R.; King, G.; Vespignani, A. The Parable of Google Flu: Traps in Big Data Analysis. Science (1979) 2014, 343,
1203–1205. [CrossRef]
178. Lazer, D.; Kennedy, R.; King, G.; Vespignani, A. Google Flu Trends Still Appears Sick: An Evaluation of the 2013–2014 Flu Season.
SSRN Electron. J. 2014, 2014, 2408560. [CrossRef]
179. Algemene Rekenkamer. Datagedreven Selectie van Aangiften Door de Belastingdienst|Rapport|Algemene Rekenkamer [Data-Driven
Selection of Tax Returns by the Dutch Tax and Customs Administration|Report|Netherlands Court of Audit]; Algemene Rekenkamer:
The Hague, The Netherlands, 2019.
180. OECD. Tax Administration 3.0: The Digital Transformation of Tax Administration; OECD: Paris, France, 2020. [CrossRef]
181. Aslett, J. Tax Administration; International Monetary Fund: Wasington, DC, USA, 2024; Volume 2024. [CrossRef]
182. WiredGov.
The Damaging Impact of Poor Quality Data in the Public Secto|Official Press Release.
Available online:
https://www.wired-gov.net/wg/content.nsf/industrynews/The+damaging+impact+of+poor+quality+data+in+the+public+
sector?open&id=BDEX-6ZFKSP (accessed on 9 November 2025).
183. Marzullo, A.; Savevski, V.; Menini, M.; Schilirò, A.; Franchellucci, G.; Dal Buono, A.; Bezzio, C.; Gabbiadini, R.; Hassan, C.; Repici,
A.; et al. Collecting and Analyzing IBD Clinical Data for Machine-Learning: Insights from an Italian Cohort. Data 2025, 10, 100.
[CrossRef]
184. Tlouyamma, J.; Mokwena, S. Automated Data Quality Control System in Health and Demographic Surveillance System. Sci. Eng.
Technol. 2024, 4, 82–91. [CrossRef]
185. Razzaghi, H.; Goodwin Davies, A.; Boss, S.; Bunnell, H.T.; Chen, Y.; Chrischilles, E.A.; Dickinson, K.; Hanauer, D.; Huang, Y.;
Ilunga, K.T.S.; et al. Systematic Data Quality Assessment of Electronic Health Record Data to Evaluate Study-Specific Fitness:
Report from the PRESERVE Research Study. PLoS Digit. Health 2024, 3, e0000527. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
186. Wang, Y.; Hulstijn, J.; Tan, Y.-H. Data Quality Assurance in International Supply Chains: An Application of the Value Cycle
Approach to Customs Reporting. Int. J. Adv. Logist. 2016, 5, 76–85. [CrossRef]

Data 2025, 10, 201
35 of 40
187. Zovko, L. Digitalization in Health Systems in the European Union. Bachelor’s Thesis, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia, 2025.
188. Gelashvili-Luik, T.; Vihma, P.; Pappel, I. Navigating the AI Revolution: Challenges and Opportunities for Integrating Emerging
Technologies into Knowledge Management Systems. Systematic Literature Review. Front. Artif. Intell. 2025, 8, 1595930. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
189. Masod, M.Y.B.; Zakaria, S.F. Artificial Intelligence Adoption in the Manufacturing Sector: Challenges and Strategic Framework.
Int. J. Res. Innov. Soc. Sci. 2024, 8, 150–158. [CrossRef]
190. Kapiki, S.; Pappa, A. Enhancing Healthcare Efficiency: Leveraging Advanced Maintenance Management for Optimal Staff
Performance. J. Health Organ. Manag. 2025, 39, 398–418. [CrossRef]
191. Davidson, P.L.; Hunt, J.; La Manna, A.; Luke, D.A. Editorial: Impact Evaluation Using the Translational Science Benefits Model
Framework in the National Center for Advancing Translational Science Clinical and Translational Science Award Program. Front.
Public Health 2025, 13, 1707595. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
192. Ebenso, B.; Namisango, E.; Abejirinde, I.-O.; Allsop, M.J. Editorial: The Scale-up and Sustainability of Digital Health Interventions
in Low- and Middle-Income Settings. Front. Digit. Health 2025, 7, 1634223. [CrossRef]
193. Shi, Y.; Li, J.; Kou, G.; Tien, J.M.; Berg, D. Merging Artificial Intelligence and Business Applications: Preface for ITQM 2025.
Procedia Comput. Sci. 2025, 266, 1–8. [CrossRef]
194. Pykes, K. 10 Signs of Bad Data: How to Spot Poor Quality Data. Available online: https://www.datacamp.com/blog/10-signs-
bad-data-quality (accessed on 26 August 2024).
195. Fu, A.; Shen, T.; Roberts, S.B.; Liu, W.; Vaidyanathan, S.; Marchena-Romero, K.-J.; Lam, Y.Y.P.; Shah, K.; Mak, D.Y.F.; Chin, S.; et al.
Optimizing the Efficiency and Effectiveness of Data Quality Assurance in a Multicenter Clinical Dataset. J. Am. Med. Inform.
Assoc. 2025, 32, 835–844. [CrossRef]
196. Haverila, M.J.; Haverila, K.C. The Influence of Quality of Big Data Marketing Analytics on Marketing Capabilities: The Impact of
Perceived Market Performance! Mark. Intell. Plan. 2024, 42, 346–372. [CrossRef]
197. Lee, D.-H.; Kim, H. A Self-Attention-Based Imputation Technique for Enhancing Tabular Data Quality. Data 2023, 8, 102.
[CrossRef]
198. Becerra, M.A.; Tobón, C.; Castro-Ospina, A.E.; Peluffo-Ordóñez, D.H. Information Quality Assessment for Data Fusion Systems.
Data 2021, 6, 60. [CrossRef]
199. MacDonald, L. MeasuringDataQuality: KeyMetrics,Processes,andBestPractices. Available online: https://www.montecarlodata.com/
blog-measuring-data-quality-key-metrics-processes-and-best-practices/ (accessed on 27 August 2024).
200. Karkošková, S. Data Governance Model to Enhance Data Quality in Financial Institutions. Inf. Syst. Manag. 2023, 40, 90–110.
[CrossRef]
201. Sluzki, N. 8 Data Quality Monitoring Techniques & Metrics to Watch. Available online: https://www.ibm.com/think/topics/data-
quality-monitoring-techniques (accessed on 27 August 2024).
202. Verma, P.; Kumar, V.; Mittal, A.; Rathore, B.; Jha, A.; Rahman, M.S. The Role of 3S in Big Data Quality: A Perspective on
Operational Performance Indicators Using an Integrated Approach. TQM J. 2023, 35, 153–182. [CrossRef]
203. Woods, C.; Selway, M.; Bikaun, T.; Stumptner, M.; Hodkiewicz, M. An Ontology for Maintenance Activities and Its Application to
Data Quality. Semant. Web 2024, 15, 319–352. [CrossRef]
204. Stepanenko, R. Data Stewardship Explained: The Backbone of Data Management. Available online: https://recordlinker.com/data-
stewardship-explained/ (accessed on 14 September 2025).
205. Jatin, B. Data Governance for Quality: Policies Ensuring Reliable Data. Available online: https://www.decube.io/post/data-
quality-data-governance (accessed on 27 August 2024).
206. Hanna, M.G.; Pantanowitz, L.; Jackson, B.; Palmer, O.; Visweswaran, S.; Pantanowitz, J.; Deebajah, M.; Rashidi, H.H. Ethical and
Bias Considerations in Artificial Intelligence/Machine Learning. Mod. Pathol. 2025, 38, 100686. [CrossRef]
207. Duggireddy, G.B.R. Integrated Data and AI Governance Framework: A Lifecycle Approach to Responsible AI Implementation. J.
Comput. Sci. Technol. Stud. 2025, 7, 771–777.
208. Papagiannidis, E.; Mikalef, P.; Conboy, K. Responsible Artificial Intelligence Governance: A Review and Research Framework. J.
Strateg. Inf. Syst. 2025, 34, 101885. [CrossRef]
209. Floridi, L.; Taddeo, M. What Is Data Ethics? Philos. Trans. R. Soc. A Math. Phys. Eng. Sci. 2016, 374, 20160360. [CrossRef]
210. Pahune, S.; Akhtar, Z.; Mandapati, V.; Siddique, K. The Importance of AI Data Governance in Large Language Models. Big Data
Cogn. Comput. 2025, 9, 147. [CrossRef]
211. Forrest, S. Study Examines Accuracy of Arrest Data in FBI’s NIBRS Crime Database. Available online: https://phys.org/news/2022-
02-accuracy-fbi-nibrs-crime-database.html (accessed on 15 August 2024).
212. Labarrère, N.; Costa, L.; Lima, R.M. Data Science Project Barriers—A Systematic Review. Data 2025, 10, 132. [CrossRef]
213. Illinois Criminal Justice Information Authority. Annual Audit Report for 1982–1983: Data Quality of Computerized Criminal Histories;
National Criminal Justice Reference Service (NCJRS): Rockville, MD, USA, 1983.

Data 2025, 10, 201
36 of 40
214. Bosse, R.C.; Jino, M.; de Franco Rosa, F. A Study on Data Quality and Analysis in Business Intelligence; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg,
Germany, 2024; pp. 249–253. [CrossRef]
215. Sienkiewicz, M. From Data Silos to Data Mesh: A Case Study in Financial Data Architecture. In Proceedings of the 36th
International Conference, DEXA 2025, Bangkok, Thailand, 25–27 August 2025; pp. 3–20. [CrossRef]
216. Senguttuvan, K.R. Multi-Agent Based Automated Data Quality Engineering. Master’s Thesis, Fordham University, New York,
NY, USA, 2025.
217. Stamkou, C.; Saprikis, V.; Fragulis, G.F.; Antoniadis, I. User Experience and Perceptions of AI-Generated E-Commerce Content: A
Survey-Based Evaluation of Functionality, Aesthetics, and Security. Data 2025, 10, 89. [CrossRef]
218. Vanam, R.R.; Pingili, R.; Myadaboyina, S.G. AI-Based Data Quality Assurance for Business Intelligence and Decision Support
Systems. Int. J. Emerg. Trends Comput. Sci. Inf. Technol. 2025, 6, 21–29. [CrossRef]
219. Elouataoui, W.; El Mendili, S.; Gahi, Y. An Automated Big Data Quality Anomaly Correction Framework Using Predictive
Analysis. Data 2023, 8, 182. [CrossRef]
220. Pasupuleti, S. AI-Augmented Data Pipelines: Integrating Machine Learning for Intelligent Data Processing. J. Comput. Sci. Technol.
Stud. 2025, 7, 276–283.
221. Dhanekula, A. AI-Driven Business Intelligence Framework for Predictive Decision-Making and Strategic Resource Optimization.
Int. J. Bus. Econ. Insights 2025, 05, 1238–1270. [CrossRef]
222. Tomar, S.; Kadaverugu, R. Trend Analysis of Long-Term Temperature Data for Prediction of Heat Waves Through Statistical Analysis
Using Extreme Value Theory for Climate Disaster Management; Springer: Singapore, 2025; pp. 91–106. [CrossRef]
223. Cinar, R.F.; Yuksek, G.; Lale, T.; Ekinci, S.; Izci, D.; Ma’arif, A. SHAP-Based Framework for Temporal Detection of Sensor Drift in
Gas Sensor Arrays. J. Robot. Control 2025, 6, 2592–2601.
224. Shafaghat, A. Integrating Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning to Forecast Air Pollution Impacts on Climate Variability
and Public Health. bioRxiv 2025, 2025, 685968. [CrossRef]
225. Ermilov, A.; Tveritnev, A.; Trusova, A. New Role of Technical Specialists to Enable Digital Transformation in the Petroleum
Industry: A Petrophysicist-Based Proof of Concept. In Proceedings of the Abu Dhabi International Petroleum Exhibition and
Conference, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, 3–6 November 2025; SPE: Washington, DC, USA, 2025. [CrossRef]
226. ISO 8000-8:2015; Data Quality—Part 8: Information and Data Quality: Concepts and Measuring. ISO: Geneva, Switzerland, 2015.
227. Abhishek, A.; Erickson, L.; Bandopadhyay, T. Data and AI Governance: Promoting Equity, Ethics, and Fairness in Large Language
Models. arXiv 2025, arXiv:2508.03970. [CrossRef]
228. Angwin,
J.;
Larson,
J.;
Mattu,
S.;
Kirchner,
L.;
ProPublica.
Machine Bias—ProPublica.
Available online:
https://www.propublica.org/article/machine-bias-risk-assessments-in-criminal-sentencing (accessed on 1 November 2025).
229. Obermeyer, Z.; Powers, B.; Vogeli, C.; Mullainathan, S. Dissecting Racial Bias in an Algorithm Used to Manage the Health of
Populations. Science 2019, 366, 447–453. [CrossRef]
230. Batool, A.; Zowghi, D.; Bano, M. AI Governance: A Systematic Literature Review. AI Ethics 2025, 5, 3265–3279. [CrossRef]
231. Gebru, T.; Morgenstern, J.; Vecchione, B.; Vaughan, J.W.; Wallach, H.; Daumé, H., III; Crawford, K. Datasheets for Datasets.
Commun. ACM 2021, 64, 86–92. [CrossRef]
232. Franklin, G.; Stephens, R.; Piracha, M.; Tiosano, S.; Lehouillier, F.; Koppel, R.; Elkin, P.L. The Sociodemographic Biases in Machine
Learning Algorithms: A Biomedical Informatics Perspective. Life 2024, 14, 652. [CrossRef]
233. Leslie, D. Understanding Artificial Intelligence Ethics and Safety; The Alan Turing Institute: London, UK, 2019.
234. Belenguer, L. AI Bias: Exploring Discriminatory Algorithmic Decision-Making Models and the Application of Possible Machine-
Centric Solutions Adapted from the Pharmaceutical Industry. AI Ethics 2022, 2, 771–787. [CrossRef]
235. Cross, T.P.; Wagner, A.; Bibel, D. The Accuracy of Arrest Data in the National Incident-Based Reporting System (NIBRS). Crime
Delinq. 2023, 69, 2484–2507. [CrossRef]
236. Bayram, F.; Ahmed, B.S. Towards Trustworthy Machine Learning in Production: An Overview of the Robustness in MLOps
Approach. ACM Comput. Surv. 2025, 57, 1–35. [CrossRef]
237. Kore, A.; Abbasi Bavil, E.; Subasri, V.; Abdalla, M.; Fine, B.; Dolatabadi, E.; Abdalla, M. Empirical data drift detection experiments
on real-world medical imaging data. Nat. Commun. 2024, 15, 1887. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
238. Wilkinson, M.D.; Dumontier, M.; Aalbersberg, I.J.; Appleton, G.; Axton, M.; Baak, A.; Blomberg, N.; Boiten, J.-W.; da Silva Santos,
L.B.; Bourne, P.E.; et al. The FAIR Guiding Principles for Scientific Data Management and Stewardship. Sci. Data 2016, 3, 16001.
[CrossRef]
239. Mons, B.; Schultes, E.; Liu, F.; Jacobsen, A. The FAIR Principles: First Generation Implementation Choices and Challenges. Data
Intell. 2020, 2, 1–9. [CrossRef]
240. Stvilia, B.; Pang, Y.; Lee, D.J.; Gunaydin, F. Data Quality Assurance Practices in Research Data Repositories—A Systematic
Literature Review. An Annual Review of Information Science and Technology (ARIST) Paper. J. Inf. Sci. Technol. 2025, 76, 238–261.
[CrossRef]
241. Open Data Institute. A Framework for AI-Ready Data; Open Data Institute: London, UK, 2025.

Data 2025, 10, 201
37 of 40
242. Publications Office of the European Union. Principles and Recommendations to Make Data.Europa.Eu Data More Reusable; Publications
Office of the European Union: Luxembourg, 2022.
243. Clark, T.; Caufield, H.; Parker, J.A.; Al Manir, S.; Amorim, E.; Eddy, J.; Gim, N.; Gow, B.; Goar, W.; Haendel, M.; et al. AI-Readiness
for Biomedical Data: Bridge2AI Recommendations. bioRxiv 2024, 2024, 619844. [CrossRef]
244. Hiniduma, K.; Byna, S.; Bez, J.L.; Madduri, R. AI Data Readiness Inspector (AIDRIN) for Quantitative Assessment of Data
Readiness for AI. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Scientific and Statistical Database Management, Rennes,
France, 10–12 July 2024; ACM: New York, NY, USA, 2024; pp. 1–12. [CrossRef]
245. Ravi, N.; Chaturvedi, P.; Huerta, E.A.; Liu, Z.; Chard, R.; Scourtas, A.; Schmidt, K.J.; Chard, K.; Blaiszik, B.; Foster, I. FAIR
Principles for AI Models with a Practical Application for Accelerated High Energy Diffraction Microscopy. Sci. Data 2022, 9, 657.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
246. ISO/IEC 42001:2023; Information Technology—Artificial Intelligence—Management System. International Organization for
Standardization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2023.
247. Morshed, A. Ensuring Trust in Sustainability Financial Reports: The Role of AI and Blockchain in Metadata Standardization.
Manag. Sustain. Arab Rev. 2025, 2025, 1–24. [CrossRef]
248. Kamisetty, N.S. Intelligent Cloud-Based KNN Model for Enhancing Data Quality in SAP Financial Systems. Int. J. Res. Appl.
Innov. (IJRAI) 2025, 8, 12909–12914.
249. European Parliament; European Council. Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 June 2024
Laying down Harmonized Rules on Artificial Intelligence and Amending Certain Legislative Acts (Artificial Intelligence Act); European
Union: Brussels, Belgium, 2024.
250. Loza Corera, M. Data and Data Governance and Connections to Data Protection Principles in Article 10 of the Artificial Intelligence
Act. In The European Union Artificial Intelligence Act; CotinoHueso, L., GaLetta, D., Eds.; Editoriale Scientifica: Napoli, Italy, 2025;
pp. 595–626.
251. National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). Artificial Intelligence Risk Management Framework (AI RMF 1.0). NIST
Special Publication 1270; NIST: Gaithersburg, MD, USA, 2023.
252. Rodríguez Valencia, L.; Ochoa Arellano, M.J.; Gutiérrez Figueroa, S.A.; Mur Nuño, C.; Monsalve Piqueras, B.; Corrales Paredes,
A.D.V.; Bemposta Rosende, S.; López López, J.M.; Puertas Sanz, E.; Levi Alfaroviz, A. A Systematic Review of Artificial Intelligence
Applied to Compliance: Fraud Detection in Cryptocurrency Transactions. J. Risk Financ. Manag. 2025, 18, 612. [CrossRef]
253. Alotaibi, K.O. Developing a Comprehensive Financial Reporting Governance Framework Using AI Techniques. Eng. Technol.
Appl. Sci. Res. 2025, 15, 29202–29207.
254. Santos, W.D.S.; Coutinho, J.R.; Baião, F.; Miranda Spyrides, G.; Vieira Lopes, H.C. Enhancing Declarative Business Process
Management Availability through Generative AI. Process Sci. 2025, 2, 21. [CrossRef]
255. Ali, S.; Rehman, T.; Saira, S. Exploring Pakistan’s Legal Challenges in Artificial Intelligence Regulation: A Data-Driven Approach.
Crit. Rev. Soc. Sci. Stud. 2025, 3, 1096–1108. [CrossRef]
256. Bayram, F.; Ahmed, B.S.; Hallin, E. Adaptive Data Quality Scoring Operations Framework Using Drift-Aware Mechanism for
Industrial Applications. J. Syst. Softw. 2024, 217, 112184. [CrossRef]
257. Cheong, B.C. Transparency and accountability in AI systems: Safeguarding wellbeing in the age of algorithmic decision-making.
Front. Hum. Dyn. 2024, 6, 1421273. [CrossRef]
258. Bayram, S.B.; Caliskan, N. Effect of a Game-Based Virtual Reality Phone Application on Tracheostomy Care Education for Nursing
Students: A Randomized Controlled Trial. Nurse Educ. Today 2019, 79, 25–31. [CrossRef]
259. High-Level Expert Group on AI (AI HLEG). Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy AI; European Union: Brussels, Belgium, 2019.
260. Eubanks, V. Automating Inequality: How High-Tech Tools Profile, Police, and Punish the Poor; St. Martin’s Press: New York, NY, USA,
2018.
261. Lyu, Q.; Tan, J.; Zapadka, M.E.; Ponnatapura, J.; Niu, C.; Myers, K.J.; Wang, G.; Whitlow, C.T. Translating Radiology Reports into
Plain Language Using ChatGPT and GPT-4 with Prompt Learning: Results, Limitations, and Potential. Vis. Comput. Ind. Biomed.
Art 2023, 6, 9. [CrossRef]
262. Kazlaris, I.; Antoniou, E.; Diamantaras, K.; Bratsas, C. From Illusion to Insight: A Taxonomic Survey of Hallucination Mitigation
Techniques in LLMs. AI 2025, 6, 260. [CrossRef]
263. Anh-Hoang, D.; Tran, V.; Nguyen, L.-M. Survey and Analysis of Hallucinations in Large Language Models: Attribution to
Prompting Strategies or Model Behavior. Front. Artif. Intell. 2025, 8, 1622292. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
264. Farquhar, S.; Kossen, J.; Kuhn, L.; Gal, Y. Detecting Hallucinations in Large Language Models Using Semantic Entropy. Nature
2024, 630, 625–630. [CrossRef]
265. Polyzotis, N.; Zinkevich, M.; Roy, S.; Breck, E.; Whang, S. Data Validation for Machine Learning. In Proceedings of the Second
Conference on Machine Learning and Systems, SysML 2019, Stanford, CA, USA, 31 March–2 April 2019.
266. Gautam, A.R. Impact of High Data Quality on LLM Hallucinations. Int. J. Comput. Appl. 2025, 187, 35–39. [CrossRef]

Data 2025, 10, 201
38 of 40
267. Chelli, M.; Descamps, J.; Lavoué, V.; Trojani, C.; Azar, M.; Deckert, M.; Raynier, J.-L.; Clowez, G.; Boileau, P.; Ruetsch-Chelli,
C. Hallucination Rates and Reference Accuracy of ChatGPT and Bard for Systematic Reviews: Comparative Analysis. J. Med.
Internet Res. 2024, 26, e53164. [CrossRef]
268. Park, S.; Nan, X. Generative AI and Misinformation: A Scoping Review of the Role of Generative AI in the Generation, Detection,
Mitigation, and Impact of Misinformation. AI Soc. 2025, 1–15. [CrossRef]
269. Simon, F.M.; Altay, S.; Mercier, H. Misinformation Reloaded? Fears about the Impact of Generative AI on Misinformation Are
Overblown. Harv. Kennedy Sch. Misinform. Rev. 2023. [CrossRef]
270. Ferrara, C.; Sellitto, G.; Ferrucci, F.; Palomba, F.; De Lucia, A. Fairness-Aware Machine Learning Engineering: How Far Are We?
Empir. Softw. Eng. 2024, 29, 9. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
271. Ali, S.; Abuhmed, T.; El-Sappagh, S.; Muhammad, K.; Alonso-Moral, J.M.; Confalonieri, R.; Guidotti, R.; Del Ser, J.; Díaz-
Rodríguez, N.; Herrera, F. Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI): What We Know and What Is Left to Attain Trustworthy
Artificial Intelligence. Inf. Fusion 2023, 99, 101805. [CrossRef]
272. Lahusen, C.; Maggetti, M.; Slavkovik, M. Trust, Trustworthiness and AI Governance. Sci. Rep. 2024, 14, 20752. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
273. Jarmakovica, A. Machine Learning-Based Strategies for Improving Healthcare Data Quality: An Evaluation of Accuracy,
Completeness, and Reusability. Front. Artif. Intell. 2025, 8, 1621514. [CrossRef]
274. Seabra, A.; Cavalcante, C.; Ruberg, N.; Lifschitz, S. AI-Driven Semantic Data Quality Assessment and Scoring for Relational Databases;
Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2025; pp. 199–206. [CrossRef]
275. Lesouple, J.; Baudoin, C.; Spigai, M.; Tourneret, J.-Y. Generalized Isolation Forest for Anomaly Detection. Pattern Recognit. Lett.
2021, 149, 109–119. [CrossRef]
276. Mohammed, S.; Budach, L.; Feuerpfeil, M.; Ihde, N.; Nathansen, A.; Noack, N.; Patzlaff, H.; Naumann, F.; Harmouch, H. The
Effects of Data Quality on Machine Learning Performance on Tabular Data. Inf. Syst. 2025, 132, 102549. [CrossRef]
277. Mowla, N.I. A Guide to Data Quality Testing for AI Applications Based on Standards; RISE Research Institutes of Sweden: Gothenburg,
Sweden, 2024.
278. EU FRA. Data Quality and Artificial Intelligence–Mitigating Bias and Error to Protect Fundamental Rights; European Union Agency for
Fundamental Rights: Viena, Austria, 2019.
279. Pulicharla, M.R. Detecting and Addressing Model Drift: Automated Monitoring and Real-Time Retraining in ML Pipelines. World
J. Adv. Res. Rev. 2019, 3, 147–152. [CrossRef]
280. Patchipala, S.G. Tackling Data and Model Drift in AI: Strategies for Maintaining Accuracy during ML Model Inference. Int. J. Sci.
Res. Arch. 2023, 10, 1198–1209. [CrossRef]
281. Poppy, D. Data Governance Frameworks for AI-Driven orgs|dbt Labs. Available online: https://www.getdbt.com/blog/data-
governance-frameworks-ai?utm_source=chatgpt.com (accessed on 10 November 2025).
282. Troyanskaya, O.; Cantor, M.; Sherlock, G.; Brown, P.; Hastie, T.; Tibshirani, R.; Botstein, D.; Altman, R.B. Missing Value Estimation
Methods for DNA Microarrays. Bioinformatics 2001, 17, 520–525. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
283. Li, W.; Wu, Y.; Huang, W.; Zhou, F.; Ou, W.; Wang, H.; Deng, L. System Log Anomaly Detection Based on Contrastive Learning
and Retrieval Augmented. Sci. Rep. 2025, 15, 38370. [CrossRef]
284. Hansen, H.T. Intelligent Cloud-Native DevOps Architecture for Enterprise Transformation Leveraging Blockchain, BERT
Models, and AI-Powered Financial Cryptosystems. Int. J. Res. Publ. Eng. Technol. Manag. 2025, 8, 1–5. Available online:
https://ijrpetm.com/index.php/IJRPETM/article/view/172/168 (accessed on 2 November 2025).
285. Meng, T.; Jing, X.; Yan, Z.; Pedrycz, W. A Survey on Machine Learning for Data Fusion. Inf. Fusion 2020, 57, 115–129. [CrossRef]
286. Ziv, L.; Nakash, M. Behind the Algorithm: International Insights into Data-Driven AI Model Development. Mach. Learn. Knowl.
Extr. 2025, 7, 122. [CrossRef]
287. Dibouliya, A. Unified Data Governance Framework for AI-Enabled Data Warehouses in Banking. Eur. Mod. Stud. J. 2025, 9, 67–76.
[CrossRef]
288. Wendt, D.W. Continuous Improvement. In AI Strategy and Security; Apress: Berkeley, CA, USA, 2025; pp. 175–184. [CrossRef]
289. Grant, B.; Welch, M.; Deutschman, C.; McElcheran, C.; Badzynski, A.; Bell, J.A.H.; Hope, A.; Grant, R.C.; Truong, T.; Lane, K.; et al.
Abstract PR-04: A Practical Framework for Operationalizing Responsible and Equitable AI in Healthcare: Tackling Bias, Inequity,
and Implementation Challenges. Clin. Cancer Res. 2025, 31 (Suppl. 13), PR-04. [CrossRef]
290. Bhosale, A.M. Implementing PowerBI Reporting for Quality Analysis in Decision Making Processes. Master’s Thesis, Politecnico
di Torino, Turin, Italy, 2025.
291. Verma, R.K. Digital Twin Technology for Process Optimization and Smart Manufacturing Systems. Int. J. Res. Publ. Eng. Technol.
Manag. (IJRPETM) 2025, 8, 12699–12701.
292. Raji, I.D.; Smart, A.; White, R.N.; Mitchell, M.; Gebru, T.; Hutchinson, B.; Smith-Loud, J.; Theron, D.; Barnes, P. Closing the AI
Accountability Gap. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, Barcelona, Spain,
27–30 January 2020; ACM: New York, NY, USA, 2020; pp. 33–44. [CrossRef]

Data 2025, 10, 201
39 of 40
293. Floridi, L.; Cowls, J.; Beltrametti, M.; Chatila, R.; Chazerand, P.; Dignum, V.; Luetge, C.; Madelin, R.; Pagallo, U.; Rossi, F.; et al.
AI4People—An Ethical Framework for a Good AI Society: Opportunities, Risks, Principles, and Recommendations. Minds Mach.
(Dordr.) 2018, 28, 689–707. [CrossRef]
294. Selbst, A.D.; Boyd, D.; Friedler, S.A.; Venkatasubramanian, S.; Vertesi, J. Fairness and Abstraction in Sociotechnical Systems. In
Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, Atlanta, GA, USA, 29–31 January 2019; ACM:
New York, NY, USA, 2019; pp. 59–68. [CrossRef]
295. Mehrabi, N.; Morstatter, F.; Saxena, N.; Lerman, K.; Galstyan, A. A Survey on Bias and Fairness in Machine Learning. ACM
Comput. Surv. 2022, 54, 1–35. [CrossRef]
296. Morley, J.; Floridi, L.; Kinsey, L.; Elhalal, A. From What to How: An Initial Review of Publicly Available AI Ethics Tools, Methods
and Research to Translate Principles into Practices. In Ethics, Governance, and Policies in Artificial Intelligence; Floridi, L., Ed.;
Springer Nature: Cham, Switzerland, 2021; pp. 144–153.
297. Mitchell, M.; Wu, S.; Zaldivar, A.; Barnes, P.; Vasserman, L.; Hutchinson, B.; Spitzer, E.; Raji, I.D.; Gebru, T. Model Cards for
Model Reporting. In Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, Atlanta, GA, USA, 29–31
January 2019; ACM: New York, NY, USA, 2019; pp. 220–229. [CrossRef]
298. Jobin, A.; Ienca, M.; Vayena, E. The Global Landscape of AI Ethics Guidelines. Nat. Mach. Intell. 2019, 1, 389–399. [CrossRef]
299. Whittlestone, J.; Nyrup, R.; Alexandrova, A.; Cave, S. The Role and Limits of Principles in AI Ethics. In Proceedings of the 2019
AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society; ACM: New York, NY, USA, 2019; pp. 195–200. [CrossRef]
300. Goellner, S.; Tropmann-Frick, M.; Brumen, B. Responsible Artificial Intelligence: A Structured Literature Review. arXiv 2024.
[CrossRef]
301. Zeng, Y.; Lu, E.; Huangfu, C. Linking Artificial Intelligence Principles. arXiv 2018. [CrossRef]
302. Lu, J.; Liu, A.; Dong, F.; Gu, F.; Gama, J.; Zhang, G. Learning under Concept Drift: A Review. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 2018,
31, 2346–2363. [CrossRef]
303. Adepoju, A.S. Adaptive Program Management Strategies for AI-Based Cyber Defense Deployments in Critical Infrastructure and
Enterprise Digital Transformation Initiatives. Int. J. Res. Publ. Rev. 2025, 6, 5599–5615. [CrossRef]
304. Widmer, G.; Kubat, M. Learning in the Presence of Concept Drift and Hidden Contexts. Mach. Learn. 1996, 23, 69–101. [CrossRef]
305. Sayles, J. Designing a Well-Governed AI Lifecycle Model. In Principles of AI Governance and Model Risk Management; Apress:
Berkeley, CA, USA, 2024; pp. 85–111. [CrossRef]
306. Park, C. Addressing Challenges for the Effective Adoption of Artificial Intelligence in the Energy Sector. Sustainability 2025, 17,
5764. [CrossRef]
307. Mulyaningsih, S.R.; Ghoffar, A.; Mufrihah, A.; Hasanah, I.; Aun, A. Self-Adaptive Systems: Redefining Best Practices in AI and
Big Data in Recruitment. In Emerging Technologies for Recruitment Strategy and Practice; Vasudevan, K., Vasudevan, S.K., Sudha, M.,
Eds.; IGI Global: Hershey, PA, USA, 2023; pp. 77–103.
308. Baum, S.D.; Owe, A. Artificial Intelligence Needs Environmental Ethics. Ethics Policy Environ. 2023, 26, 139–143. [CrossRef]
309. Morley, J.; Kinsey, L.; Elhalal, A.; Garcia, F.; Ziosi, M.; Floridi, L. Operationalising AI Ethics: Barriers, Enablers and next Steps. AI
Soc. 2023, 38, 411–423. [CrossRef]
310. Asokan, D.R.; Smith, C.M.; Huq, F.A. Digitalisation as a Catalyst for Supplier Diversity, Equity and Inclusion. Int. J. Oper. Prod.
Manag. 2025, 2025, 1–26. [CrossRef]
311. Mahler, S. Building Trust in Workplace AI Why Governance Outweighs Employee Co-Creation in Building Trust. Ph.D. Thesis,
Vorarlberg University of Applied Sciences, Dornbirn, Austria, 2025.
312. Sagona, M.; Dai, T.; Macis, M.; Darden, M. Trust in AI-Assisted Health Systems and AI’s Trust in Humans. npj Health Syst. 2025, 2,
10. [CrossRef]
313. Agate, J. Artificial Intelligence Methods and Approaches to Improve Data Quality in Healthcare Data. Artif. Intell. Life Sci. 2025, 8,
100135. [CrossRef]
314. Stoudt, S.; Jernite, Y.; Marshall, B.; Marwick, B.; Sharan, M.; Whitaker, K.; Danchev, V. Ten Simple Rules for Building and
Maintaining a Responsible Data Science Workflow. PLoS Comput. Biol. 2024, 20, e1012232. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
315. Korbmacher, M.; Azevedo, F.; Pennington, C.R.; Hartmann, H.; Pownall, M.; Schmidt, K.; Elsherif, M.; Breznau, N.; Robertson, O.;
Kalandadze, T.; et al. The Replication Crisis Has Led to Positive Structural, Procedural, and Community Changes. Commun.
Psychol. 2023, 1, 3. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
316. Dudda, L.; Kormann, E.; Kozula, M.; DeVito, N.J.; Klebel, T.; Dewi, A.P.M.; Spijker, R.; Stegeman, I.; Van den Eynden, V.;
Ross-Hellauer, T.; et al. Open Science Interventions to Improve Reproducibility and Replicability of Research: A Scoping Review.
R. Soc. Open Sci. 2025, 12, 242057. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
317. MacMaster, S.; Sinistore, J. Testing the Use of a Large Language Model (LLM) for Performing Data Quality Assessment. Int. J. Life
Cycle Assess. 2024, 1–12. [CrossRef]

Data 2025, 10, 201
40 of 40
318. WHO. Overview of the Data Quality Review (DQR) Frameworkand Methodology; WHO: Geneva, Switzerland, 2020.
319. Patra, P.; Di Pompeo, D.; Di Marco, A. An Evaluation Framework for the FAIR Assessment Tools in Open Science. arXiv 2025,
arXiv:2503.15929. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
