Quelle: Exploring_Self-Adaptivity_Towards_Performance_and_Energy_for_Time-Stepping_Methods.pdf
Gesamtseiten: 9
================================================================================


--- Seite 1 ---
Exploring Self-Adaptivity towards Performance and
Energy for Time-stepping Methods
Natalia Kalinnik1, Robert Kiesel2, Thomas Rauber1,M a r c e lR i c h t e r2and Gudula R ¨unger2
1University Bayreuth
Email:{natalia.kalinnik,rauber }@uni-bayreuth.de
2Chemnitz University of Technology
Email:{robert.kiesel,m.richter,ruenger }@cs.tu-chemnitz.de
Abstract —Time-stepping simulation methods oﬀer potential
for self-adaptivity, since the ﬁrst time steps of the simulation
can be used to explore the hardware characteristics and measure
which of several available implementation variants leads to
a good performance and energy consumption on the given
hardware platform. The version with the best performance
or the smallest energy consumption can then be used for
the remaining time steps. However, the number of variants
to test may be quite large and diﬀerent simulation methods
may require diﬀerent approaches for self-adaptivity. In this
article, we explore the potential for self-adaptivity of several
methods from scientiﬁc computing. In particular, we consider
particle simulation methods, solution methods for diﬀerential
equations, as well as sparse matrix computations and explore
the potential for self-adaptivity of these methods, considering
both performance and energy consumption as target function.
Index Terms —autotuning, performance and energy analy-
sis, time-stepping methods.
I. Introduction
Performance and energy consumption are important
aspects for executing parallel application programs on
HPC platforms. Porting an existing application program
to a new hardware platform may be challenging, especially
if the given performance characteristics should be retained
or even improved and if the new hardware platform is
heterogeneous. Many tuning steps and implementation
adaptations may be necessary to meet the desired re-
quirements for performance and energy consumption. The
tuning process may be time-consuming, especially if the
application is a complex software system that has been
d e v e l o p e do v e rm a n yy e a r s .I nt h i sc o n t e x t ,i tw o u l db e
desirable that the runtime behavior of the application
program could adapt automatically to the given hardware
platform without the need for the application programmer
to perform large modiﬁcations of the implementation. The
ability for adaptation to new systems is often called self-
adaptivity or autotuning.
There are several approaches for self-adaptivity for
speciﬁc applications [1], [2], [3]. There also exist several
general autotuning frameworks that are independent from
a speciﬁc application and aim at a performance improve-
ment for parallel applications from many application areas
by an autotuning process [4], [5], [6]. In this article,we propose a tuning methodology which lies between
application-speciﬁc and fully general tuning. More pre-
cisely, self-adaptivity for a speciﬁc class of applications
with similar computational behavior is considered, which
is more general than considering a single application, but
less general than considering arbitrary applications.
In particular, the potential for self-adaptivity for time-
stepping simulation methods from scientiﬁc computing is
investigated. The class of time-stepping simulation meth-
odsisabroadclassofapplications,whichincludesiterative
numerical methods as well as physical and chemical sim-
ulations. We address the question, which self-adaptivity
techniques can be used to support performance and en-
ergy tuning for the development of ﬂexible complex soft-
ware systems. The simulation methods considered include
sparse matrix computations, particle simulation methods,
and solution methods for ordinary diﬀerential equations.
Thecon tributionofthearticleisthepro visionofadetailed
performance and energy analysis of the diﬀerent simula-
tion methods as well as the investigation of relevant pa-
rameters which have a large inﬂuence on the performance
and energy consumption. Moreover, we analyze whether
the parameters identiﬁed are amenable to self-adaptivity
and which methodology for self-adaptivity is suitable for
which of the time-stepping methods. Oﬄine and online
techniques for self-adaptivity are considered and it is that,
depending on the simulation method and the parameters
identiﬁed, diﬀerent approaches for self-adaptivity are best
suited for diﬀerent application programs.
The rest of the article is structured as follows. Section
II gives an overview of oﬄine and online autotuning ap-
proaches. Section III considers time-stepping applications
and discusses their potential for self-adaptivity. Section IV
discusses related work and Section V concludes the article.
II. Overview of approaches for self-adaptivity
Application software that facilitates self-adaptivity is
able to alter its behavior by providing mechanisms for self-
adjustment or self-modiﬁcation according to changes of
the environmental or structural conditions. The term self-
adaptivity has already been introduced and investigated
1152018 30th International Symposium on Computer Architecture and High Performance Computing
978-1-5386-7769-8/18/$31.00 ©2018 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/SBAC-PAD.2018.00031
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hochschule für Technik Wirtschaft und Kultur. Downloaded on January 19,2026 at 11:05:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- Seite 2 ---
by [7]. A key component of self-adaptive software is an
evaluation mechanism that observes the behavior of the
software such that irregularities and non-optimal perfor-
mance can be recognized. With this information, the soft-
ware can adjust its behavior to ensure that it is working as
intended and may even improve its performance based on
changing to more suitable execution modes. This section
provides an overview of oﬄine and online mechanisms for
self-adaptivity considering time-stepping methods.
A. Tuning parameters and possibilities
The performance of application software may depend on
diverse factors to varying degrees. The inﬂuencing factors
for runtime performance are already well researched for
speciﬁc applications. However, the optimization of energy
consumption or the decision whether certain runtime im-
provements, e.g. due to a rising number of threads, are suf-
ﬁcient concerning the increased energy consumption may
arise as key considerations for future application software.
Therefore, we provide a short overview of relevant factors.
A simulation method from scientiﬁc computing is per-
formed based on a given implementation. This implemen-
tation can be altered by correctness-preserving program
transformations, e.g. loop unrolling or loop tiling, SIMD
instructions and the consideration of memory prefetchers.
The resulting pool of implementation versions can then
be used to select implementations suitable to pursue given
optimization goals.
In case of loop transformations, relevant factors are for
example the unroll factor and the blocking factor for loop
unrolling and loop tiling, respectively. In addition to the
choice of such transformation parameter values, the order
of applied transformations may also have a signiﬁcant
inﬂuence on the achieved performance. Accordingly, per-
formance models such as the ECM model [8] could be used
to identify appropriate program transformations.
Ashardware-speciﬁcparametersshouldbeconsideredas
major factors of performance optimization, many tuning
parameters have to be taken into account. Therefore, the
number and mapping of threads and processes to actual
resources of a HPC system, the adaptation of a given
implementation to hardware characteristics with appropri-
ate compilers and dynamic voltage and frequency scaling
(DVFS) regarding energy consumption in particular con-
stitute crucial factors for self-adaptivity.
Since input data for simulation methods are often the
most inﬂuential component, their characteristics deter-
mine which algorithms are the most eﬃcient ones and how
the data should be organized to ensure an optimal pro-
cessing. Examples are signal processing [2], sparse linear
algorithms with sparse input vectors and matrices [9], and
particle simulation methods which depend on the input
data due to particle movements during the simulation.
B. Oﬄine and online approaches for self-adaptivity
The focus of our investigation is on self-adaptivity for
time-stepping simulation methods from scientiﬁc comput-ingandthesuitablechoiceofonlineandoﬄineapproaches,
which may have varying signiﬁcance and impact.
1) Oﬄine Autotuning: Oﬄine approaches are used to
determine suitable tuning parameter values and imple-
mentation versions before the actual execution of the
simulation, i.e. within a preceding oﬄine phase. There-
fore, main considerations regard invariant properties such
as hardware-speciﬁc characteristics, available implementa-
tion versions and their performance with diﬀerent classes
of application-speciﬁc input data, and the limitation of
tuning parameter search spaces. In particular, hardware
speciﬁcations can provide the number and arrangement
of available cores, core frequencies, latencies of memory
structures and network connections and the availability of
accelerator cards, e.g. GPUs. Hence, diﬀerent implemen-
tation versions can be tested with diverse input scenarios
to obtain a small set of suitable implementations covering
all relevant input scenarios and the given hardware con-
ﬁguration. Moreover, tuning parameters could be limited
by reasonable minimum and maximum values, which can
be used in an online phase to ﬁnd an optimal value more
eﬃciently. This process can be supported by performance
models such as ECM or the Rooﬂine model [10].
2) Online Autotuning: An online tuning phase is
present during the execution of the simulation software
and has three major objectives: reﬁne relevant tuning
parameters, select the most eﬃcient implementation ver-
sion and adapt to input data characteristics that may
change over time. A key component is the time interval-
based evaluation of the actual performance behavior based
on runtime and energy measurements. Accordingly, the
software uses self-adaptive mechanisms, e.g. to change the
implementation version or parameter values, and, thus,
adapts its behavior to pursue the given optimization goals
asbestaspossible.Thechallengeofonlineapproachesisto
minimize the impact on the actual simulation performance
while integrating the self-adaptation process.
III. Tuning examples and experimental results
The potential for self-adaptivity is investigated with
experimental studies considering three diverse application
ﬁelds, i.e. particle simulation methods, sparse matrix com-
putations, and solution methods for diﬀerential equations.
Since the runtime and energy behavior may be inﬂuenced
by several factors to a varying degree, we provide an
analysis of a variety of tuning parameters, including
the operational frequency, the degree of parallelism, and
application-speciﬁc parameters, e.g. the maximum tree
depth for particle simulation methods.
A. Particle simulation methods
Particle simulations are widely used in various areas
of computational science, such as astrophysics, biology
and chemistry. The determination of long-range particle
interactions such as Coulomb or gravitational interactions
is the major eﬀort of the simulation. The interaction
116
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hochschule für Technik Wirtschaft und Kultur. Downloaded on January 19,2026 at 11:05:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- Seite 3 ---
of the particles can be simulated with time steps. New
positions and velocities for each particle are calculated
in the simulation in each time step. However, a direct
calculation of the interactions between N particles requires
O(N2) operations. More eﬃcient methods can reduce this
complexity with splitting approaches, e.g. Fourier-based
methods and hierarchical methods. These approaches split
the particle ﬁeld in near-ﬁeld and far-ﬁeld parts. The
pairwise interactions between particles are then accurately
computed for the near-ﬁeld part while the far-ﬁeld part
might be computed approximately.
For using the near-ﬁeld and far-ﬁeld interactions, the
particle ﬁeld is often decomposed in a grid structure. The
near-ﬁeld interactions are computed inside a grid cell and
the far-ﬁeld interactions computes the interactions of a
particle with the particles outside of its grid cell. The size
of these cells can be set by parameters and may inﬂuence
the accuracy of the results of the particle simulation.
The major diﬀerence of the particle simulation approaches
is the computation of the far-ﬁeld part. In this article,
two diﬀerent approaches are considered, a Fourier-based
approach and a hierarchical tree-based approach based on
multipole expansions.
The inﬂuences on the energy consumption or runtime of
the chosen particle simulation methods are examined for
both hardware and software parameters. The examined
software parameter inﬂuences the split of the near-ﬁeld
and far-ﬁeld parts. Depending on the approach of the
method diﬀerent parameters are used for this separation.
T h eh a r d w a r ep a r a m e t e r si n c l u d et h ep r o c e s s o rt y p ea n d
architecture as well as the number of processes used.
The input data, i.e, number of particles and the initial
distribution of the particles, may also inﬂuence the en-
ergy consumption and runtime. In the experiments, we
concentrate on the inﬂuence of the particle system size,
the number of processors used, the separation between
the near-ﬁeld and far-ﬁeld parts, and the resulting grid
sizes. This allows for various optimizations where energy-
to-solution and time-to-solution needs diﬀerent parameter
conﬁgurations. The experiments are performed on an Intel
Haswell system with two Xeon E5-2683 v3 processors,
each is equipped with 14 cores and has a L3 cache size
of 35,840 KB. The performance and energy consumption
experiments are performed with two diﬀerent particle
systems, which use a periodic so called cloud-wall system.
The main system contains 300 particles, whereas 200
particles are distributed on a regular grid (wall) and 100
particlesaredistributedrandomly(cloud)aroundthewall.
For larger systems, the main system is repeated in every
directionresultinginthetwodiﬀerentparticlesystems:the
small particle system has 300 ·82particles and the large
particle system has 300 ·85particles. The particle codes
used are from the ScaFaCoS library which uses MPI for
the parallelization. The energy was measured using PAPI
5.5.1 and the RAPL interface to read the appropriate
MSR registers. The measurements do not include DRAM1101102103104105106
16 32 64 96 128 192 256 320 384 448 512Energy [J]
Grid sizeFFT energy consumption with 4 processes
Near-eld / 300x82
Far-eld / 300x82
Total / 300x82Near-eld / 300x85
Far-eld / 300x85
Total / 300x85
Figure 1. Energy consumption of the FFT-based particle simulation
method for diﬀerent grid sizes for the small and the large particle
system for 4 MPI processes.
energy consumption and are repeated 10 times to obtain
the shown average values. Intel Turbo Boost is enabled for
the experiments.
Fourier-based methods
To compute the far-ﬁeld of Fourier-based methods,
often fast Fourier transforms (FFT) can be used. This
approach proﬁts from suﬃciently uniformly distributed
particles [11]. The separation of the near-ﬁeld and far-ﬁeld
parts is set by using a speciﬁc grid size.
Fig. 1 depicts the resulting energy consumption for both
the small and the large particle system for diﬀerent grid
sizes and 4 MPI processes. The grid sizes have a signiﬁcant
inﬂuence on the energy consumption. While the energy
consumption of the near-ﬁeld decreases with an increasing
grid size, the far ﬁeld shows an increase. The optimum grid
size is achieved when the energy consumption is nearly
the same for the near-ﬁeld and far-ﬁeld computation. The
o p t i m u mg r i ds i z ei s3 2f o rt h es m a l lp a r t i c l es y s t e mf o r
4 MPI processes. For the large system the optimum grid
size is 384 for 4 MPI processes. The development of the
execution times are similar to the energy consumption.
The optimum grid size for the lowest execution time is 32
for the small particle system for 4 MPI processes but 384
for the large particle system (not shown in a diagram).
Fig. 2 shows the runtime and energy consumption for
various numbers of MPI processes for the small particle
system. The number of MPI processes has a higher impact
on the runtime than on the energy consumption. While
the runtime decreases with Hyperthreading, i.e. using 56
MPI processes on the system with 28 cores, the energy
consumption increases except for a grid size of 16.
Hierarchical multipole method
Another approach is the fast multipole method (FMM)
based on multipole expansions [12]. Unlike the Fourier-
based methods, the particles do not have to be uniformly
117
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hochschule für Technik Wirtschaft und Kultur. Downloaded on January 19,2026 at 11:05:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- Seite 4 ---
10-210-11101102103
 1  2  4  8  14  28  5610-210-11101102103Runtime [s]
Energy [J]
Number of MPI processesFFT runtime and energy consumption
Runtime / 16
Runtime / 32
Runtime / 192Energy / 16
Energy / 32
Energy / 192
Figure 2. Runtime and energy consumption of the FFT-based
particle simulation method for diﬀerent numbers of MPI processes
and grid sizes 16, 32 and 192 for the small particle system.
1101102103104105106107
 2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10Energy [J]
Maximum tree depthFMM energy consumption with 4 processes
Near-eld / 300x82
Far-eld / 300x82
Total / 300x82Near-eld / 300x85
Far-eld / 300x85
Total / 300x85
Figure 3. Energy consumption of the FMM particle simulation
method for diﬀerent maximum tree levels for the small and the large
particle system using 4 MPI processes.
distributed. The particles are sorted in boxes of a hierar-
chical octree structure, depending on their position in the
particle system. This octree can be inﬂuenced by setting
a maximum tree depth.
Fig. 3 shows the resulting energy consumption for the
small and the large particle system for diﬀerent maximum
treedepthsand4MPIprocesses.Themaximumtreedepth
has a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the energy consumption. The
optimum maximum tree depth is 4 for the small particle
system and 6 for the large particle system. The runtime
has the same behaviour as the energy consumption.
Potential for self-adaptivity
To get the minimal energy consumption or the best
performance, mostly the same optimization steps can be
chosen for particlesimulation methods. Therecan besmalldiﬀerences for the optimum parameters to get the best
energy consumption or performance, e.g. the number of
MPI processes. Particle simulation methods require online
tuning as the particle positions may change over time,
which can lead to a diﬀerent distribution and, thus, there
may be new optimal settings to achieve the lowest en-
ergy consumption and the best performance. Nevertheless,
since some estimates can be done before the ﬁrst time step
starts, e.g. high MPI process number for the best runtime,
oﬄine tuning can help to set acceptable start parameters.
Hence,theparametersareinitiallydeterminedinanoﬄine
phase, but must be adjusted over time in an online phase
to obtain optimized settings and respond to irregularities.
B. Sparse matrix methods
Sparse matrix operations, e.g. Cholesky factorization,
sparse matrix-vector product (SpMV) or sparse general
matrix-matrix multiplication (SpGEMM), are key compo-
nents of many application areas and, thus, require to be
performed eﬃciently with regard to diﬀerent performance
goals. The primary optimization approaches inquired still
focus the runtime performance of speciﬁc sparse matrix
operations. Although runtime performance may prevail as
the most signiﬁcant one, the scope of recent research got
more diverse in the past and there are many scientiﬁc con-
tributions considering energy consumption as an equally
important optimization goal [13].
Hence, sparse matrix operations should be adapted
to meet this new optimization challenge and investigate
known methods to ensure both optimized runtime and
energy consumption. In the case of sparse matrix methods,
the major eﬀort should be applied to store sparse matrices
eﬃciently.Therefore,theexploitationofmatrixproperties,
e.g. symmetry or speciﬁc patterns of non-zero matrix
elements, are used to ensure non-zero matrix elements
are stored consecutively and the storage of redundant
information, i.e. zero matrix elements, is minimized. The
resulting memory layouts for sparse matrices are called
sparse matrix formats (SMF). In recent research there can
be found numerous SMF [14], each exploiting speciﬁc but
diﬀerent matrix properties to ensure eﬃcient processing of
matrices of a particular application area.
Further considerations include hardware and software
parameters which can be modiﬁed and are used to provide
an insight of how diﬀerent SMF perform with regard to a
SpGEMM operation on sparse input matrices. The SMFs
considered for the comparison are Compressed Sparse
Row (CRS), Block Sparse Row (BSR) and Ellpack-Itpack
(EIP). The investigated hardware parameters are the
number of threads and the core frequency. As a software
parameter the block size of the BSR format is chosen
and evaluated using runtime and energy measurements.
The test matrix is thermal1, which has 574,458 non-zero
matrix elements, is symmetric positive deﬁnite and based
on a thermal problem. This matrix was taken from the
SuiteSparseMatrixCollection[15].TheHPCsystemsused
118
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hochschule für Technik Wirtschaft und Kultur. Downloaded on January 19,2026 at 11:05:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- Seite 5 ---
are a Skylake system with two Xeon Gold 6130 processor
each with 16 physical cores at 2.1 GHz and a Knights
Landing (KL) system with a Xeon Phi 7250 processor
with 68 physical cores at 1.4 GHz using the all-to-all
mode. Regarding the Skylake system, each physical cores
has an own L1 and L2 cache and its own tile. Thus
the Skylake system is no MIC architecture. However, the
Knights Landing has 34 tiles comprising two physical cores
and a shared 1MB L2 cache. In this work MIC was not
exploited explicitly but the algorithms were measured up
to the maximum number of threads, i.e. 272 threads for
the KL system due to the 4 threads per core support.
Since the adaptation to MIC processors is quite speciﬁc, it
may not be a primary optimization goal for an autotuning
approach aiming to address many hardware architectures.
Thus, it is not addressed in this work but will be taken
into account in future work for ﬁne-grained tuning. The
parallel sparse matrix methods are realized with OpenMP
and C++ and compiled with GCC 4.9.2 with -O2. The
energy measurements are done using PAPI 5.5.1 and the
RAPL interface to read the appropriate MSR registers.
DRAM energy consumption was not considered. The mea-
surementsarerepeated12timesandtheaveragevaluesare
shown. Intel Turbo Boost is enabled for all experiments.
As shown in Fig. 4 the lowest energy consumption could
be achieved with 64 (CRS), 48 (BSR) and 16 Threads
(EIP) for the Skylake system. Considering the numbers of
threads for the best runtime, the number of threads used
increasesforBSRto64andforEIPto32(notshowninthe
ﬁgure).Thisindicatesthatdiﬀerentoptimizationgoals,i.e.
runtime and energy consumption, require diﬀerent tuning
mechanisms to achieve the performance optimum. The
usage of all threads of the Skylake system leads to a
signiﬁcant increase in energy consumption, i.e. 39.5% for
CRS and 121.5% for BSR, in comparison to the optimal
numberofthreadsstatedabove.RegardingtheKLsystem,
the most energy eﬃcient numbers of threads are 136
(CRS), 272 (BSR) and 32 (EIP), which are also used
to achieve the optimal runtime. The increase in energy
consumption for a non-optimal number of threads is even
more severe compared to the Skylake system, i.e. the EIP
format with 272 threads shows an increase in energy of
672%asdepictedinthebottomdiagram.AlthoughtheKL
system is 33% to 37% slower than the Skylake system with
regard to the runtime measured, the energy consumption
actually diﬀers from -13% to 6%. Accordingly, the KL
system can achieve the lowest energy consumption for the
CRS and BSR format.
Diﬀerent block sizes for BSR and a varying core fre-
quency is investigated in Fig. 5. Despite the already
discussed runtime diﬀerence between the two systems,
the BSR format performs diﬀerently for the block sizes
2 and 16 as shown in the left diagrams. The optimal core
f r e q u e n c yi s2 . 1G H zf o rt h eS k y l a k es y s t e ma n d1 . 4G H z
fortheKLsystem.ExceptionsaretheBSR-2andtheBSR-
4 variant, which have an optimal frequency of 2.0 GHz and2530100
 10
4 16 32 48 64Energy to solution [J]CRS-Skylake
BSR-Skylake
EIP-Skylake
3530400
 10 100
41632 68 136 204 272
Number of threadsCRS-KL
BSR-KL
EIP-KL
Figure 4. Energy consumption of SpGEMM with three diﬀerent
SMFs and diﬀerent numbers of threads on a Skylake system (top)
and a Knights Landing (KL) system (bottom).
1.3 GHz on the Skylake and KL system, respectively. For
the BSR-2 variant this is related to the large number of
small blocks, which causes additional overhead regarding
the access to the block values, the column and the row
information, and, thus, exceed the capabilities of the cache
load bandwidth. Therefore, the higher core frequency can
not be supported and may also cause additional thread
context switches. Regarding the variable core frequency,
the expected decrease in runtime is achieved except for a
block size of 2 on the KL system. As indicated by the right
diagramsofFig.5,theblocksize2varianthasanincreased
energy consumption of up to 10% for a non-optimal core
frequency regarding the KL system. The optimal core
frequencyis1.3GHzontheKLsystemand2.0GHzforthe
Skylake system. On the Skylake system, almost all block
sizes considered suﬀer an increase in energy consumption
of at least 3% and up to 12% while using the maximum
core frequency, i.e. there is no actual beneﬁt for a block
size of 8 and a core frequency of 2.1 GHz compared to
the minimal frequency of 1.0 GHz in terms of energy
consumption.
Potential for self-adaptivity
Regarding sparse matrix methods, the signiﬁcant pa-
rameters are based on properties of the input matrices or
hardware properties as shown for the number of threads
and the core frequency in the previous section. Since
these parameters are invariant for most sparse matrix
operations, an oﬄine tuning step is the most promising
approach to apply optimizations.
Accordingly, performance models, which rely solely on
hardware conﬁgurations or static algorithmic properties,
known at compile time, can be considered to identify
both reasonable values for hardware and software pa-
rameters and suitable implementation variants. Examples
of beneﬁcial performance models are the Rooﬂine and
ECM model. These two models evaluate the signiﬁcance
of speciﬁc hardware limitation, e.g. for SIMD processing
119
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hochschule für Technik Wirtschaft und Kultur. Downloaded on January 19,2026 at 11:05:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- Seite 6 ---
 0.02 0.05 0.2 0.3
 0.1
1 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.1Runtime [s]BSR-2-Skylake
BSR-4-SkylakeBSR-8-Skylake
BSR-16-Skylake
 0.2 0.3 0.5
 0.1
1 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4
Core frequency [GHz]BSR-2-KL
BSR-4-KLBSR-8-KL
BSR-16-KL 80 85 90 95 100 105 110 115
1 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.1Energy consumption [%]BSR2-Skylake
BSR4-SkylakeBSR8-Skylake
BSR16-Skylake
 85 90 95 100 105 110 115 120
1 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4
Core frequency [GHz]BSR2-KL
BSR4-KLBSR8-KL
BSR16-KL
Figure 5. Performance diagrams for SpGEMM with the BSR format considering diﬀerent block sizes and a variable core frequency using 64
threads. Runtime (left diagrams with logarithmic y-axis) and percental energy consumption (right diagrams), i.e. using the energy measured
for the minimum frequency as reference value, are provided for a Skylake system (top) and a Knights Landing (KL) system (bottom).
or memory bandwidth, and, thus, support a selection
of suitable implementation variants. Moreover, memory
bound algorithms can be analyzed based on invariant
cache latencies to predict the optimal number of threads.
Hence, performance models can contribute to a great
extent to pursue diﬀerent optimization goals, e.g. runtime
or energy consumption.
The potential of online tuning greatly depends on the
sparse matrix method performed and the size of the
input matrices. Since large matrices may be processed on
distributed HPC systems, workload balance and adaptive
data distribution schemes can have major impact on the
achieved performance [16].
C. Solving diﬀerential equations
Numerical solution methods for ordinary diﬀerential
equations (ODEs) compute an approximate solution for
a given ordinary diﬀerential equation of the form
y/prime(x)=f(x,y(x)) with y(x0)=y0. (1)
by performing a series of time steps one after another until
the end of the predeﬁned integration interval is reached
[17]. As example method, we consider iterated Runge-
Kutta (IRK) methods which perform a ﬁxed number m
of computation steps in each time step using the approxi-
mation yκof the preceding time step. In each computation
step, a ﬁxed number sof stage vectors is computed
using the stage vectors from the preceding time step and
evaluating the function fdeﬁned by the ODE to be solved.
After the last computation step, the stage vectors are
combined and an approximation yκ+1for the next point
in time is computed. An additional approximation of lower
order can be computed additionally for error control and
for the selection of the step size for the next time step.
Overall, a four-dimensional loop structure results within
each time step and many typical loop transformations
such as loop interchange, loop unrolling, or loop tiling
can be applied. Moreover, for many sparse ODE systems,an ordering of the components can be chosen such that
the components of the argument vector yaccessed by
the function evaluation are located within a limited index
range near the component index evaluated. This property
of the function f, called limited access distance [18], allows
the implementation of special variants by overlapping of
vectors and using pipeline-like computational structure of
the computation steps m[18].
Taking the parameters of the transformations such as
tilesizesandunrollingfactorsintoaccount,alargenumber
of code variants can be generated and it is not a priori
clear, which of these variants will lead to the best perfor-
mance or to the minimum energy consumption on a given
HPC system. This is an ideal situation for autotuning.
Fig. 6 demonstrates that the input data, such as system
sizeandthenumberofthreads,hasalargeinﬂuenceonthe
resulting performance of the multi-threaded implementa-
tion variants of the IRK method. In the ﬁgure the time per
step is plotted against the increasing number of threads.
The results are shown for the BRUSS2D test problem and
for diﬀerent system sizes N. The test system BRUSS2D
is derived from a reaction diﬀusion PDE by a spatial
discretization on an N×Ngrid using the method of lines.
The resulting ODE system has dimension n=2N2.T h e
function fof BRUSS2D has a limited access distance 2 N,
i.e. it accesses only 2 Ncomponents of yto compute one
component of the function result. The experiments have
been done on a system with two Intel Xeon E5-2697 v3
processors, each equipped with 14 cores, 35 MB shared
cache and running with 2.6 GHz. In the experiments
I n t e lT u r b oB o o s ti se n a b l e d .A sR Km e t h o dw eu s e
the LobattoIIIC(8) [17] method with s= 5 stages and
m= 7 computation steps. Parallel variants of the ODE
methods are developed using pthreads and C, compiled
with GCC 4.8.5 and -O3 ﬂag. The code variants [18],
[19] exploit parallelism across the system, the nequations
of the ODE system are distributed among the available
numberofthreads p.Thevariantsdiﬀerintheloopandthe
120
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hochschule für Technik Wirtschaft und Kultur. Downloaded on January 19,2026 at 11:05:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- Seite 7 ---
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
Threads0123Runtime per step and component (s)10-7 BRUSS2D, N=460
A
ppDb1m
Dblock
PipeDb2mt
EAmt
PipeDb1m
E
D
ppDb1mt
PipeDb2m
PipeDb1mt
PipeDe2m 0 5 10 15 20 25 30
Threads0123Runtime per step and component (s)10-7 BRUSS2D, N=2960
A
ppDb1m
Dblock
PipeDb2mt
EAmt
PipeDb1m
E
D
ppDb1mt
PipeDb2m
PipeDb1mt
PipeDe2m
Figure 6. Execution time per step and component of IRK method for N= 460 (left) and N= 2960 (right) for diﬀerent numbers of threads.
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2 2.2 2.4
Frequency [GHz]406080100Runtime [s]BRUSS2D, N=2960
A
ppDb1m
Dblock
PipeDb2mt
EAmt
PipeDb1m
E
D
ppDb1mt
PipeDb2m
PipeDb1mt
PipeDe2m
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2 2.2 2.4
Frequency [GHz]500060007000800090001000011000Energy consumption [J]BRUSS2D, N=2960
A
ppDb1m
Dblock
PipeDb2mt
EAmt
PipeDb1m
E
D
ppDb1mt
PipeDb2m
PipeDb1mt
PipeDe2m
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2 2.2 2.4
Frequency [GHz]5060708090Power consumption [W]BRUSS2D, N=2960
A
ppDb1m
Dblock
PipeDb2mt
EAmt
PipeDb1m
E
D
ppDb1mt
PipeDb2m
PipeDb1mt
PipeDe2m
Figure 7. Runtime (top), energy (middle) and power consumption
(bottom) of the diﬀerent variants of the IRK method executed with
16 threads for varying clock frequencies. Test system BRUSS2D with
N= 2960.
data structures used. This results in diﬀerent utilization
of the cache and the memory hierarchy and consequently
leads to diﬀerent locality behaviour of the variants. The
variants with suﬃx ’mt’ and the variant Dblock use loop
tiling. The variants A and E use the same data structures,
but diﬀer in the order of the loops. In A the innermost
loops iterate over the system dimension, all components
are accessed with increasing index providing a high spatiallocality. E is derived from A by the loop interchange of the
two innermost loops: the system dimension and the stage
vector loop. This enables temporal reuse of the argument
vector components in write operations. The variant Eamt
is similar to E, but uses loop tiling. All other variants are
derived from the variant D, which results from several loop
interchangesandfusions.Further,PipeDb1m,PipeDb1mt,
ppDb1m and ppDb1mt variants exploit a limited access
distance of the function fof BRUSS2D. These variants
require only scalable neighbor-to-neighbor communication
and lock-based local synchronization, whereas all other
variants are suitable for ODE problems with function
fwith arbitrary access distance, and thus need global
communication and barrier operations.
Considering the diagrams in Fig. 6 we notice that the
fastest implementation variant depends on the system size
and the number of threads executing the program. For
the system size N= 460 and p≤20, the variant EAmt
delivers the best performance, whereas for N= 2960 and
thread numbers up to 12, the variant EAmt is the fastest
variant. For N= 460 and p>20, the variants A, E, EAmt
are the slowest implementations, while all other variants
obtain similar performance. For N= 2960 and p>12, the
variants PipeDb1mt and PipeDb1m exhibit the best per-
formance, closely followed by the variant PipeDb2mt. The
main reason for the lower performance of the variants A,
E and EAmt for the increasing number of threads are high
synchronization costs. These variants require two barrier
operations per stage in each computation step, whereas all
other variants need only one barrier per computation step
or use locks for the synchronization of the threads.
Fig. 7 shows the performance, the energy and the power
consumption with respect to the clock frequency for the
diﬀerent variants of the IRK method executed with 16
threads. All implementations perform 60 time steps. The
energy and the power consumption is measured using
LIKWID [20]. The energy measurements do not include
DRAM consumption and Turbo Boost is disabled. The
test system is Intel Xeon E5-2630 v3, equipped with 16
cores and 20 MB shared L3 cache. The test system is
BRUSS2D with N= 2960. The results indicate that the
best frequency depends on the optimization goal. The
121
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hochschule für Technik Wirtschaft und Kultur. Downloaded on January 19,2026 at 11:05:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- Seite 8 ---
variantyieldingthebestperformanceforagivenfrequency
is not necessarily the one with minimum energy consump-
tion. When tuning towards the minimum execution time,
t h eb e s tt i m ei sa c h i e v e da taf r e q u e n c yo f2 . 4G H zw i t h
the variant PipeDb1mt. While the smallest amount of
energy is consumed by one of the variants PipeDb1mt or
PipeDb2mt at a frequency of 2.2 GHz. Even though the
variants PipeDb1mt and PipeDb2mt are not the fastest
variants at this frequency, they show the lowest power
usage. The variant leading to the best performance at 2.2
GHz is EAmt, but compared to the PipeDb1mt variant it
consumes 15% more power and is only 3% faster.
Potential for self-adaptivity
For ODE methods a pure oﬄine autotuning cannot
be applied, since their performance and energy behavior
strongly depends on the input data, which is only available
at runtime. The access pattern of the function fof the
ODE system to be solved may have a large inﬂuence on
the resulting performance and the energy consumption of
the variants as well as the system size and for parallel
implementations the number of threads or processes exe-
cuting the program. Moreover, the characteristics of the
target architecture, such as multi-core processor design,
cache architecture, memory latency, network topology and
bandwidth have to be taken into account. The choice of
the compiler may also aﬀect the runtime and the energy
consumption of the variants as well as the alignment of
data structures in main memory. Due to the aforemen-
tioned factors, ODE methods require online autotuning.
On the other hand, the search space of candidate imple-
mentations and parameters, e.g. tile sizes for loop tiling
and factors for loop unrolling, can be quite large making
the application of a pure online autotuning not feasible,
since too many code variants would need to be evaluated.
Thus, a combination of oﬄine and online autotuning is
most promising. Performance models, like ECM, enhanced
with oﬄine measurements for the estimation of the syn-
chronization costs can be utilized to predict the execution
time of variants or at least to forecast their performance
ranking [21]. This information can be used to limit the
number of variants evaluated in the online phase. For the
optimization towards the energy consumption the analytic
energy model presented in [22] can be used in the oﬄine
phase to preselect for each implementation variant a set
of clock frequencies for which the energy consumption is
close to the minimum.
IV. Related work
First basic notions of self-adaptivity were introduced
with oﬄine approaches relying on invariant hardware
propertiesofHPCsystemsandfocusedexecutiontime.For
numerical methods for dense linear algebra problems, well
known representatives are ATLAS [1] and PHiPAC [23].
Further investigations of potential techniques to optimize
performance and energy consumption of linear algebraalgorithms were made by [13]. However, characteristics
of input data may imply considerable inﬂuence on the
execution time and, thus, indicate that oﬄine approaches
are not suﬃcient. Hence, online approaches should be
applied to facilitate self-adaptation based on properties
of input data. Typical examples of input data dependent
problems are signal processing and sparse linear algebra.
Accordingly, input data may decide which algorithm is
the most eﬃcient one and how data is stored, distributed
and processed eﬃciently. Examples for such approaches
are FFTW [2], SPIRAL [3] and OSKI [9]. An approach
of autotuning for SpMV and sparse matrix multiplication
is presented in [24]. Other self-adaptivity approaches are
based on domain-speciﬁc languages and utilize compiler
generated code versions, which can be evaluated in an
online phase [25], [26].
Application independent frameworks that facilitate self-
adaptivity such as Active Harmony [4], Parcae [5] and
Periscope [6] are often based on compiler approaches.
An overview of compiler-based frameworks considering
machine learning approaches is presented in [27].
An online autotuning approach to optimize the perfor-
mance of parallel solution methods of ODEs is proposed in
[19]. In this approach the autotuning towards the energy
eﬃciency has not been considered and the number of
threads has not been optimized. An autotuning approach
for the FMM to optimize its parameters was shown in [28].
Their approach was based on experiments, but did not
consider the energy consumption.
Autotuning approaches for minimizing the energy con-
sumption have been investigated in [29], [30]. By means
of multi-objective autotuning an application can be opti-
mized for more than one optimization goal simultaneously.
Insieme [31] is a compiler framework for multi-objective
tuning of parallel programs, it is used in [32] to autotune
applications with multiple regions.
V. Conclusions
Self-adaptivity is a property of software to alter its
behavior, which requires appropriate autotuning mech-
anisms. The tuning potential considered in this article
can be separated into oﬄine and online approaches. The
results show that particle simulation methods require
online autotuning, for sparse matrix computations oﬄine
autotuning is mainly suitable and for solution methods
for diﬀerential equations a mixture of both approaches
comprises the most potential.
Invariant hardware parameters such as the number of
available cores and their adjustable core frequency show
a signiﬁcant impact on runtime and energy consumption
for all investigated methods. However, application-speciﬁc
parameters, input data and diverse implementation ver-
sions comprise additional tuning potential which can have
a greater inﬂuence than the investigated hardware proper-
ties. This was shown for varying grid sizes and maximum
tree depths for particle simulations, diverse sparse matrix
122
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hochschule für Technik Wirtschaft und Kultur. Downloaded on January 19,2026 at 11:05:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- Seite 9 ---
formats and block sizes for sparse matrix multiplication
and for ODE methods for varying system sizes. For ODE
methods also the order of computations and memory
accesses within time steps as well as the access pattern
of the problem function fhave a large inﬂuence on the
resulting performance and the energy consumption.
Since the signiﬁcance of tuning approaches, which pro-
vide the most beneﬁt, greatly varies between the appli-
cation methods analyzed, autotuning approaches which
support solely either oﬄine or online autotuning may not
be suﬃcient to fully utilize given resources and, thus, miss
great potential to further optimize runtime and energy
consumption. Hence, tuning mechanisms that may proﬁt
from interaction between an oﬄine and online phase can
not be utilized to full extent or not at all.
Acknowledgement
This work has been supported by the German Min-
istry of Science and Education (BMBF), project title
SeASiTe (Self-Adaptation of Time-step-based Simulation
Techniques on Heterogeneous HPC Systems) with project
number 01IH16012A/B.
References
[1] R. Whaley, A. Petitet, and J. Dongarra,“Automated empirical
optimizations of software and the ATLAS project,” Parallel
Computing , vol. 27, no. 1-2, pp. 3–35, 2001.
[2] M. Frigo and S. Johnson, “The design and implementation of
FFTW3,” Proc. of the IEEE , vol. 93, no. 2, pp. 216–231, 2005.
[3] M. P ¨uschel, J. Moura, J. Johnson, D. Padua, M. Veloso,
B. Singer, J. Xiong, F. Franchetti, A. Gacic, Y. Voronenko,
K. Chen, R. Johnson, and N. Rizzolo, “SPIRAL: Code gener-
ation for DSP transforms,” P r o c .o ft h eI E E E , vol. 93, no. 2,
pp. 232– 275, 2005.
[4] A. Tiwari and J. K. Hollingsworth,“Online adaptive code gen-
eration and tuning,”in Proc. of the 2011 IEEE Int. Parallel &
Distributed Processing Symp. (IPDPS 2011) , pp. 879–892, 2011.
[5] A. Raman, A. Zaks, J. Lee, and D. August,“Parcae: A System
for Flexible Parallel Execution,” in Proc. of the 33rd ACM
SIGPLAN Conf. on Programming Language Design and Imple-
mentation , PLDI ’12, pp. 133–144, 2012.
[6] M. Gerndt, E. C´ esar, and S. Benkner, eds., Automatic Tuning of
HPC Applications – The Periscope Tuning Framework . Shaker
Verlag, 2015.
[7] J. Aseltine, A. Mancini, and C. Sarture, “A survey of adap-
tive control systems,” IRE Transactions on Automatic Control ,
vol. 6, pp. 102–108, Dec 1958.
[8] J. Hofmann, J. Eitzinger, and D. Fey, “Execution-Cache-
Memory Performance Model: Introduction and Validation,”
ArXiv e-prints , Sept. 2015.
[9] R. Vuduc, J. Demmel, and K. Yelick,“OSKI: A library of auto-
matically tuned sparse matrix kernels,” in Institute of Physics
Publishing , 2005.
[10] S. Williams, A. Waterman, and D. Patterson, “Rooﬂine: An
insightfulvisualperformancemodelformulticorearchitectures,”
Commun. ACM , vol. 52, pp. 65–76, Apr. 2009.
[11] R. W. Hockney and J. W. Eastwood, Computer Simulation
Using Particles . Bristol, PA, USA: Taylor & Francis, Inc., 1988.
[12] L. Greengard, The Rapid Evaluation of Potential Fields in
Particle Systems . Boston: MIT Press, 1988.
[13] L. Tan, S. Kothapalli, L. Chen, O. Hussaini, R. Bissiri, and
Z. Chen,“A survey of power and energy eﬃcient techniques for
high performance numerical linear algebra operations,” Parallel
Comput. , vol. 40, pp. 559–573, Dec. 2014.[14] D. Langr, I. Simecek, P. Tvrd´ ık, T. Dytrych, and J. P. Draayer,
“Adaptive-blocking hierarchical storage format for sparse ma-
trices,”2012 Federated Conference on Computer Science and
Information Systems (FedCSIS) , pp. 545–551, 2012.
[15] T.A.DavisandY.Hu,“TheUniversityofFloridaSparseMatrix
Collection,” ACM Trans. Math. Softw. ,v o l .3 8 ,n o .1 ,p p .1 : 1 –
1:25, 2011.
[16] S. Lee and R. Eigenmann,“Adaptive runtime tuning of parallel
sparse matrix-vector multiplication on distributed memory sys-
tems,”in Proceedings of the 22Nd Annual International Confer-
ence on Supercomputing , ICS ’08, pp. 195–204, ACM, 2008.
[17] E. Hairer, S. Nørsett, and G. Wanner, Solving Ordinary Diﬀer-
ential Equations I: Nonstiﬀ Problems . Springer, 1993.
[18] M. Korch and T. Rauber, “Locality optimized shared-memory
implementations of iterated Runge-Kutta methods,” in Euro-
Par 2007. Parallel Processing , vol. 4641 of Springer LNCS ,
pp. 737–747, Springer, 2007.
[19] N. Kalinnik, M. Korch, and T. Rauber, “Online auto-tuning
for the time-step-based parallel solution of ODEs on shared-
memory systems,” J. of Parallel and Distributed Computing ,
vol. 74, no. 8, pp. 2722–2744, 2014.
[20] J. Treibig, G. Hager, and G. Wellein, “LIKWID perfor-
mance tools,” in Competence in High Performance Computing
(C. Bischof et al.,e d s . ) ,2 0 1 0 .
[21] J.Seiferth,C.Alappat,M.Korch,andT.Rauber,“Applicability
of the ECM Performance Model to Explicit ODE Methods on
Current Multi-core Processors,”in High Performance Comput-
ing, pp. 163–183, Springer, 2018.
[ 2 2 ] T .R a u b e r ,G .R ¨unger, and M. Stachowski,“Model-based opti-
mizationoftheenergyeﬃciencyofmulti-threadedapplications,”
inProc. of the 8th Int. Green and Sustainable Comp. Conf.,
IGSC, pp. 1–6, 2017.
[23] J. Bilmes, K. Asanovic, C. Chin, and J. Demmel, “Optimizing
Matrix Multiply Using PHiPAC: A Portable, High-performance,
ANSI C Coding Methodology,” in Proc. of the 11th Int. Conf.
on Supercomputing , ICS ’97, pp. 340–347, 1997.
[24] B. C. Lee, R. W. Vuduc, J. W. Demmel, and K. A. Yelick,
“Performance models for evaluation and automatic tuning of
symmetric sparse matrix-vector multiply,” in Int. Conf. on
Parallel Processing , pp. 169–176 vol.1, Aug 2004.
[25] M. Christen, O. Schenk, and H. Burkhart,“PATUS: A code gen-
eration and autotuning framework for parallel iterative stencil
computations on modern microarchitectures,” in P r o c .o ft h e
25th IEEE Int. Parallel and Distributed Processing Symp. , 2011.
[26] Y. Tang, R. A. Chowdhury, B. C. Kuszmaul, C.-K. Luk, and
C. E. Leiserson,“The Pochoir stencil compiler,”in P r o c .o ft h e
Twenty-third Annual ACM Symp. on Parallelism in Algorithms
and Architectures (SPAA ’11) , pp. 117–128, 2011.
[27] A. H. Ashouri, G. Palermo, J. Cavazos, and C. Silvano, Auto-
matic Tuning of Compilers Using Machine Learning . Springer
Publishing Company, Incorporated, 1st ed., 2017.
[28] H. Dachsel, M. Hofmann, J. Lang, and G. R ¨unger,“Automatic
tuning of the fast multipole method based on integrated perfor-
mance prediction,”in Int. Conf. on High Performance Comput-
ing and Communication (HPCC’12) , pp. 617–624, IEEE, 2012.
[29] A. Tiwari, M. A. Laurenzano, L. Carrington, and A. Snavely,
“Auto-tuning for energy usage in scientiﬁc applications,” in
Proc.of the 2011 Int. Conf. on Parallel Processing , Euro-Par’11,
pp. 178–187, Springer, 2012.
[30] A. Panyala, D. Chavarra-Miranda, J. B. Manzano, A. Tumeo,
and M. Halappanavar, “Exploring performance and energy
tradeoﬀs for irregular applications,” J. Parallel Distrib. Com-
put., vol. 104, pp. 234–251, June 2017.
[31] P. Gschwandtner, J. J. Durillo, and T. Fahringer, “Multi-
objective auto-tuning with insieme: Optimization and trade-oﬀ
analysis for time, energy and resource usage,”in Euro-Par 2014
Parallel Processing , pp. 87–98, Springer, 2014.
[32] K. Koﬂer, J. J. Durillo, P. Gschwandtner, and T. Fahringer,“A
region-aware multi-objective auto-tuner for parallel programs,”
in46th Int. Conf. on Parallel Processing Workshops (ICPPW) ,
pp. 190–199, Aug 2017.
123
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hochschule für Technik Wirtschaft und Kultur. Downloaded on January 19,2026 at 11:05:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 