Quelle: reliability_availability_virtualized_networks.pdf
Gesamtseiten: 38
================================================================================


--- Seite 1 ---
1
Reliability and Availability in Virtualized Networks:
A Survey on Standards, Modeling Approaches, and
Research Challenges
Mario Di Mauro, Walter Cerroni, Fabio Postiglione, Massimo Tornatore, Kishor S. Trivedi
Abstract —The rise of Network Function Virtualization (NFV)
has transformed network infrastructures by replacing fixed
hardware with software-based Virtualized Network Functions
(VNFs), enabling greater agility, scalability, and cost efficiency.
While inspired by cloud computing innovations, this shift in-
troduces new challenges in ensuring reliability and availability.
Virtualization increases the distribution of system components
and introduces stronger interdependencies. As a result, failures
become harder to predict, monitor, and manage compared to
traditional monolithic networks. Reliability, i.e. the ability of
a system to perform regularly under specified conditions, and
availability, i.e. the probability of a system of being ready to use,
are critical requirements that must be guaranteed to maintain
seamless network operations. Accurate modeling of these aspects
is crucial for designing robust, fault-tolerant virtualized systems
that can withstand service disruptions, ensuring continuous
user access. Accordingly, this survey focuses on reliability and
availability attributes of virtualized networks from a modeling
perspective. After introducing the NFV standard architecture
and basic definitions, we discuss the standardization efforts of
the European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI),
which provides guidelines, recommendations, and architectural
solutions through a series of standard documents focusing on
reliability and availability (denoted by the acronym ETSI-REL).
Next, we explore several formalisms proposed in the literature
for characterizing reliability and availability, with a focus on
their application to modeling the failure and repair behavior of
virtualized networks through practical examples. As a relevant
contribution, we overview numerous references demonstrating
how different authors adopt specific methods to characterize
reliability and/or availability of architectural components in a
virtualized network system. Moreover, we present a selection of
the most valuable software tools that support modeling of reliable
virtualized networks. Finally, we discuss a set of challenges and
open problems with the aim to encourage readers to explore
further advances in the field, and contribute to the ongoing
development of reliable virtualized networks.
Index Terms —Reliability, Availability, Virtualized Networks,
NFV , Modeling formalisms, ETSI NFV-REL.
M. Di Mauro and F. Postiglione are with University of Salerno, Italy and
with National Inter-University Consortium for Telecommunications (CNIT),
Italy ({mdimauro,fpostiglione}@unisa.it).
W. Cerroni is with the Department of Electrical, Electronic, and
Information Engineering “G. Marconi,” University of Bologna, Italy
(walter.cerroni@unibo.it).
M. Tornatore is with Politecnico di Milano, Italy (mas-
simo.tornatore@polimi.it).
K.S. Trivedi is is with the Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Duke University, USA (ktrivedi@duke.edu)
1This manuscript is a preprint and has not been peer-reviewed. A shorter
version has been submitted to IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials
(COMST). Copyright may be transferred upon acceptance.LIST OF ACRONYMS
AMF Access and Mobility Management Function
CNF Containerized Network Function
CNR Containerized Network Replica
CNT Container
CSCF Call Session Control Function
CSPN Coloured Stochastic Petri Networks
CTMC Continuous-Time Markov Chain
DCK Docker
DTMC Discrete-Time Markov Chain
EMS Element Management System
ETA Event Tree Analysis
ETSI European Telecommunications Standards
Institute
FMEA Failure Modes and Effects Analysis
FMECA Failure Modes, Effects, and Criticality
Analysis
FT Fault Tree
FTA Fault Tree Analysis
GSPN Generalized Stochastic Petri Networks
HA High Availability
HSS Home Subscriber Server
HYP Hypervisor
HW Hardware
IaaS Infrastructure as a Service
IMS IP Multimedia Subsystem
MDD Multi-valued Decision Diagram
MEC Mobile Edge Computing
MRGP Markov Regenerative Process
MRM Markov Reward Model
MSS Multi-State System
MTTF Mean Time to Failure
MTTR Mean Time to Repair
MUGF Multidimensional Universal Generating
Function
NFV Network Function VirtualizationarXiv:2503.22034v1  [cs.NI]  27 Mar 2025
--- Seite 2 ---
2
NFV-REL NFV Reliability (ETSI standard)
NFVI Network Function Virtualization Infrastructure
NFV-MANO NFV Management and Network Orchestration
NFVO Network Function Virtualization Orchestration
NMP Non-Markovian Process
NS Network Slicing
OSS/BSS Operations/Business Support Systems
PTE Phase-Type Expansion
QoS Quality of Service
RAMS Reliability, Availability, Maintainability, and
Safety
RBD Reliability Block Diagram
SAN Stochastic Activity Networks
SDN Software Defined Networking
SF Service Function
SFC Service Function Chain
SLA Service Level Agreement
SMF Session Management Function
SMP Semi-Markov Process
SPN Stochastic Petri Networks
SRN Stochastic Reward Networks
UE User Equipment
UGF Universal Generating Function
UPF User Plane Function
VIM Virtualized Infrastructure Manager
VM Virtual Machine
VNF Virtual Network Function
VNF-FG VNF Forwarding Graph
VNFM Virtual Network Function Manager
I. I NTRODUCTION AND ORGANIZATION
Network Function Virtualization (NFV) refers to the trans-
formation of traditional hardware-based network functions into
software-based implementations of service components, also
known as Virtualized Network Functions (VNFs), that can run
on commodity computing hardware [1], [2]. Unlike traditional
devices such as routers, firewalls, and switches, VNFs can be
dynamically instantiated, scaled, and migrated across different
hardware platforms, bringing to network management and
service provisioning the agility and efficiency levels typical
of cloud computing paradigms [3], [4].
In virtualized network scenarios, reliability andavailability
are very critical aspects, as virtualized systems are inherently
characterized by increased complexity and component het-
erogeneity, making them particularly vulnerable to unplanned
downtime due to not only hardware faults, but also software
bugs, malfunctioning and misconfigurations [5]. Reliability
refers to the system’s ability to perform its required functions
under stated conditions without failure during a given interval
Fig. 1: Distribution of years in the selected references.
of time, while availability is the probability that a system is
operational when required, often expressed as a percentage of
uptime over a given period.
Accurate reliability/availability modeling of virtualized in-
frastructures is crucial for designing fault-tolerant systems
resilient to service disruption, enabling users to access re-
sources as needed. This is evidenced by standardization efforts
undertaken by the European Telecommunications Standards
Institute (ETSI), which has proposed a set of dedicated
standard documents focusing on reliability and availability
problems specifically related to NFV-based infrastructures.
However, translating the pragmatic needs related to relia-
bility/availability design of virtualized networks into abstract
formal models is challenging because it requires a combination
of both practical and methodological skills. This process
involves not only understanding theoretical frameworks and
mathematical models but also applying hands-on experience
gained from working on real-world problems.
Inspired by these challenges, in this survey we delve into
multiple facets of reliability and availability in virtualized net-
works, exploring standards, formalisms, and relevant modeling
software packages. Our analysis aims to strike a balance,
providing insights into formalisms without overwhelming
readers with excessive mathematical detail. Instead, we focus
on practical implications and their relevance to real-world
applications, ensuring accessibility and applicability for a wide
audience.
The content of the paper is organized as follows.
Section II discusses existing surveys that focus on various
aspects of reliability and availability in virtualized and cloud-
based network infrastructures. Each survey offers a unique
perspective on the topic, such as resiliency techniques in cloud
networks, dependability problems for the NFV orchestrator,
or high-availability aspects in software-defined networks. This
section also emphasizes the original perspective adopted in our
survey, distinguishing it from related literature.
Section III provides a brief overview of the NFV ecosystem,
--- Seite 3 ---
3
I. IntroductionII. Related SurveysIII. NFV Overview & Connected ParadigmsA. Network SlicingB. Service Function ChainingC. Software Defined Networking IV. Reliability & Availability  A. Useful definitionsV. Standardization efforts
VI.Modeling Formalisms & Refs.A.Reliability Block DiagramsB. Fault TreesC. Continuous-Time Markov ChainsD.Markov Reward ModelsE.Multi-State SystemsF.Stochastic Petri NetsG. Generalized Stochastic Petri NetsH.Stochastic Activity NetsI.Stochastic Reward NetsJ.Non-Markovian ProcessesK.Multi-level ModelsVII.Modeling ToolsA.SHARPEB.TimeNETC.SPNPD.MercuryE.WebSPNF.GreatSPNG.MöbiusH.CPN IDEI.QPMEJ.APNN-ToolboxK.SnoopyL. SureM.PIPE2N.ORIS ToolO.BlockSim®P.Rel. Workbench®Q.BQR Care®R.ITEM ToolKit®A. The ‘’nines’’ metricB. The role of ETSIB. Quantitative evaluationA. NoveltiesList of AcronymsB. Comparison criteria
VIII. Conclusion & Open ChallengesA.Scalability IssuesB. Fault tolerance and ResilienceC. Security and TrustD. Energy EfficiencyE. Automation and OrchestrationF.SW tools enhancementG.ML & AIPaperOrganization
Non state-space models
State-space modelsH.EmergingTechnologies
Fig. 2: Paper Organization.
along with related paradigms such as network slicing, service
function chaining, and software-defined networks, highlighting
the main reliability and availability challenges.
In Sect. IV we introduce formal definitions related to reli-
ability and availability, which will be extensively referenced
throughout the survey.
Section V addresses the reliability aspects of virtualized
networks from a standardization point of view, discussing the
guidelines released by ETSI (and denoted by the acronym
ETSI NFV-REL).
Section VI introduces a taxonomy of the most well-known
modeling formalisms, categorized as non-state space, state-
space, and multi-level, according to credited literature [6].
This section outlines the pros and cons of each formalism
and includes an extensive mapping of142selected references
(76conferences, 62journals, 4book chapters), demonstrating
how to apply the existing models to characterize virtualized
networks from a reliability and availability viewpoint. The
distribution of the references in terms of year of appearance
is shown in Fig. 1.
In Sect. VII, we present a selection of the most well-known
software tools, both commercial and open-source, that support
the formal modeling of reliable virtualized networks.
Section VIII concludes the survey by also identifying a
series of challenges and open issues designed to stimulate
readers to pursue further advances in the field of reliable
virtualized networks.
For the reader’s convenience, the whole paper structure is
outlined in Fig. 2.II. R ELATED SURVEYS AND NOVELTIES OF THE CURRENT
WORK
The primary objective of this survey is to offer a systematic
compendium for researchers and practitioners interested in
modeling reliability and availability of virtualized network sys-
tems, and in becoming familiar with the formalisms, method-
ologies, and software tools used for modeling. Although
there are no existing surveys offering a similar angle, it is
useful to analyze other related surveys that offer alternative
perspectives. For the sake of conciseness, in this section, we
consider only a selection of surveys that are closely related to
reliability and availability topics applied to virtualized network
infrastructures.
We find it convenient to group these surveys based
on specific application domains of network virtualization:
Cloud computing environments, NFV components/modules,
Software-defined systems, Domain-specific environments.
It is also worth noting that, although the authors of the
following surveyed papers may define some concepts slightly
differently, they generally follow Avizienis’ terminology [7],
where: failure is an event that occurs when the delivered
service deviates from the correct service; fault is the hy-
pothesized cause of an error that leads to a service failure;
fault tolerance refers to the ability to prevent service failures;
resiliency is often considered synonymous with fault tolerance;
and robustness describes the system’s ability to continue
functioning despite external faults.
--- Seite 4 ---
4
Cloud Computing environments
A survey on resiliency techniques in cloud computing is
proposed in [8]. The authors offer a qualitative overview of
various types of failures that can occur in cloud infrastructures
including physical and virtual layers. Then, a number of
techniques for cloud computing resiliency are surveyed. Such
techniques are categorized into different groups: 𝑖)resiliency
in facilities (e.g., power supplies, business continuity); 𝑖𝑖)
resiliency in servers (e.g., physical and virtual server, RAID
and backup strategies); 𝑖𝑖𝑖)resiliency in networks (e.g., re-
silient design and traffic engineering, topology redundancy);
𝑖𝑣)resiliency in cloud integrated infrastructures (e.g., reliable
placement of virtual resources, failure detection and mitiga-
tion);𝑣)resiliency in cloud middleware infrastructures (e.g.,
checkpoint management, resilient load balancing); 𝑣𝑖)mea-
surement of resiliency (e.g. empirical measurements, passive
measurements). The last part of this survey focuses on the
resiliency in application design and development, where core
objects (logic of the application) are separately analyzed from
data objects (content used and/or produced by the logic).
A survey of fault tolerance methods for cloud computing
environments is proposed in [9], where the authors present a
general three-category taxonomy: Reactive methods (RAMs),
Proactive methods (PRMs), and Resilient methods (RSMs).
Reactive methods are employed to mitigate the effect of
failures once they have occurred, and include techniques such
as restarting, replication, and exception handling, task resub-
mission. Typically, RAMs are not well-suited for short running
tasks (e.g., real-time) since the recovery from a failure adds
non-negligible delays to the overall response times. Proactive
methods are based on the prediction of failures and include
software rejuvenation, self-healing, preemptive migration, and
active monitoring. Differently from RAMs, PRMs are suitable
for real-time applications. Resilient methods enable a system
to continue providing critical services even in presence of
failures. The main purpose of RSMs is to predict faults and
deploy strategies to prevent or mitigate their impact.
RSMs can benefit from the application of reinforcement
learning algorithms, aimed at continuously learning the en-
vironment and adapting to fault tolerance situations.
In [10], the authors present a review of resilient and de-
pendable approaches in cloud-based distributed environments,
examining aspects such as fault tolerance and redundancy. The
review primarily categorizes papers based on criteria such
as the publisher (e.g., IEEE, ACM, Elsevier), frameworks
and software tools used in simulations/analytics/testbeds (e.g.,
Matlab, Raspberry Pi, JavaScript), attributes considered (e.g.,
resiliency, scalability, dependability), and architectures studied
(e.g., Cloud computing, Fog computing, IoT).
Finally, a survey on availability mechanisms and strategies
adopted in cloud computing systems is presented in [11].
To identify the most relevant papers for their analysis, the
authors of the survey developed a taxonomy that considers
metrics related to failures, failure detection, and replication.
NFV components/modules
A survey on fault management problems affecting NFV-
based environments is presented in [12], where the authorspinpoint several issues pertaining to: 𝑖)scalability , meant
as the ability of a network to maintain its performance
as traffic increases, guaranteed by the distribution of VNFs
which implies an increasing robustness to service failures; 𝑖𝑖)
topology , dealing with the possibility for an NFV infrastructure
to flexibly adapt its topology as network failures occur; 𝑖𝑖𝑖)
granularity , referring to the possibility of precisely identifying
a fault into an NFV layer due to the hardware/software decou-
pling logic; 𝑖𝑣)fault tolerance , referring to the possibility of
avoiding the single point of failure problem through a smart
redundancy of virtualized nodes; 𝑣)performance , meant as the
ability of guaranteeing a given Quality of Service (QoS) level.
The survey proposed in [13] focuses on a specific compo-
nent of virtualized networks represented by the NFV Orches-
trator (NFVO), whose dependability is analyzed according to
the concept of dependability defined in [7]. In particular, the
authors of this survey stress the fact that the NFVO should
be characterized by a strong robustness. To guarantee such a
condition, fault detection, redundancy strategies, diagnosis and
detection policies must be adequately planned. Accordingly,
some crucial principles to design a dependable NFVO are
discussed, including: 𝑖)avoiding single point of failures by
adopting modularity and redundancy strategies; 𝑖𝑖)imple-
menting redundant control policies such as distributed-load
or master/slave; 𝑖𝑖𝑖)considering failure-independent domains
aimed at avoiding the propagation of failures across the various
NFV modules.
Reliability and availability issues of the NFV ecosystem
are also highlighted in [14], where the authors clarify that
such features are not only related to the customers expectation,
but are also part of regulatory requirements. This is because
virtualized infrastructures are today part of critical national
networks, thus, legal obligations for service assurance and
business continuity are in place.
A taxonomy of various aspects of network services
dependability is proposed in [15]. Specifically, the authors
focus on service availability, reliability, and continuity
as key attributes of dependability. They review 102 papers,
categorized according to different criteria, including protection
mechanisms, life-cycle phases, and solution approaches to
address network service dependability in the context of NFV .
Software-defined systems
Authors in [16] adopt a perspective mainly focused on
Software Defined Networking (SDN), which provides the main
separation logic between control and data planes into the realm
of virtualized networks. In particular, fault tolerance issues
are categorized per layers . Fault tolerance problems at the
infrastructure layer are mostly related to issues also present
in traditional networks and include nodes and links failures.
The difference is that an SDN infrastructure makes it easier
to manage: 𝑖)network failure detection and location, since
an SDN controller has a logically centralized view of all
SDN switches affected by specific failures, and 𝑖𝑖)network
failure recovery, since an SDN controller can manage traffic
engineering, links backup, routes reorganization. Fault toler-
ance problems at the control layer involve both infrastructural
aspects, since multiple/distributed controllers may be deployed
--- Seite 5 ---
5
to avoid the single point of failure, and protocol aspects, since
the OpenFlow protocol natively supports particular messages
to assign different roles to the controller (Master/Slave/Equal).
Fault tolerance problems at the application layer typically
involve the application design that should take into account
fault tolerance requirements, and the application correctness
which implies a strong test phase.
Considering again the challenges involving the SDN
fault management, authors in [17] focus on four tasks: 𝑖)
system monitoring , related to the activity of monitoring the
SDN system behavior and collecting statistical data related
to monitoring metrics; 𝑖𝑖)fault diagnosis , related to the
possibility of detecting faults along with the location of the
pertinent root cause; 𝑖𝑖𝑖)fault recovery and repair , related to
the techniques aimed at reconfiguring a system after a fault
occurred;𝑖𝑣)fault tolerance , related to proactively preventing
the faults with the goal of guaranteeing service continuity.
Domain-specific environments
Aspects related to reliability and high availability in vir-
tualized networks for domain-specific environments, such
as mobile core networks and service function chain (SFC)
deployments, are also addressed in surveys [18] and [19],
respectively. As already highlighted in many other works,
the presence of a single controller in an SDN network is
risky since it is a potential single point of failure. Thus,
according to [18], a hot-standby design for the SDN controller
with proper redundancy is highly recommended to increase
availability and reliability in mobile core networks. Similar
issues arise in an NFV environment, where the problem of
maintaining the state of virtualized elements can be faced
through a proper redundancy strategy that takes into account
the reliability/performance trade-off.
The survey in [19] focuses on the SFC provisioning in
NFV/SDN architectures, where the whole section 5.3is de-
voted to the availability-aware deployment of SFCs. Authors
survey a number of works dealing with recovery schemes,
backup strategies, failure detection and localization, algorithms
to provide resilient SFC services with minimum resource
redundancy, reliability-aware VNF placement to optimize the
SFC resilience, etc.
A. Main contributions of this survey
In our work, we provide a set of unique contributions that
distinctly differentiate it from the surveys analyzed before.
First, we give readers a clear understanding of the standardiza-
tion efforts related to reliability and availability in virtualized
networks, by examining and commenting on a series of
ETSI documents and guidelines. In this overview, we discuss
how these standards influence the design and management of
reliable and available virtualized networks. Only few of the
existing surveys propose a systematic classification of ETSI
documents, which are crucial for the reader to capture the
standard guidelines in this field.
Second, we present various formalisms and methods used
to model reliability and availability in virtualized networks.
This part is written to be accessible to readers who may not behighly skilled in mathematics. Key elements include: 𝑖)taxon-
omy of formalisms and methods, where we introduce a range
of modeling approaches, each explained in a clear and ac-
cessible language, 𝑖𝑖)pros and cons, outlining the advantages
and limitations of each formalism and method, helping readers
to understand the contexts in which each approach is most
effective,𝑖𝑖𝑖)a structured overview of selected references,
designed to help readers easily determine which formalism
is best suited for modeling specific aspects of virtualized
networks. Existing surveys only mention the techniques used
to model the failure/repair behavior of virtualized networks,
but they do not delve into the specifics of the formalisms or
explain why the authors choose them.
Finally, for readers interested in applying these formalisms
in the field, we outline the main features of the most well-
known software tools, both open source and commercial. Most
existing surveys do not propose a systematic categorization of
software tools useful for modeling the failure/repair behavior
of virtualized networks. Instead, those surveys mention only
highly customized software tools created ad hoc to solve very
specific problems in the field.
By integrating the aforementioned contributions, our survey
aims to offer a balanced and comprehensive resource that elu-
cidates the theoretical, standardization, and practical aspects
of reliability and availability in virtualized networks.
B. Comparison criteria
A concise comparison of our work with the surveys an-
alyzed above is provided in Table I. While each study has
its unique characteristics, we have identified a set of general
criteria to evaluate our work against the discussed technical
literature. These criteria are as follows:
•Techniques & metrics : The work examines techniques,
formalisms, models, and metrics related to the reliability
and availability of virtualized networks;
•Standard guidelines : The work examines the standardiza-
tion processes governing the reliability and availability of
virtualized networks;
•Tools & SW support : The work assesses software tools
that can effectively model the reliability and availability
aspects of virtualized networks, highlighting their key
features;
•Practical examples & case studies : The work provides
an extensive collection of practical examples and case
studies, helping readers identify the best methodologies
for analyzing their specific scenarios;
•Tutorial-like characteristics : The work includes action-
able insights on the use of formalisms in reliability and
availability assessments of virtualized networks, while
avoiding excessive technical or mathematical complexity.
To help the reader to visualize the positioning of our work
with respect to existing surveys, in Table I we assigned scores
to each criterion as follows: sufficient coverage ( ✓), good
coverage ( ✓✓), and high coverage ( ✓✓✓ ).
--- Seite 6 ---
6
TABLE I: Summary and comparison of related survey papers
SurveyTechniques
& metricsStandard
guidelinesTools &
SW supportPractical examples
& case studiesTutorial-like
characteristicsBrief description
Colman-Meixner et al. [8] ✓✓✓ ✓ ✓✓ ✓✓✓ ✓✓Qualitative overview of failures in virtualized networks,
and analysis of cloud computing resiliency techniques
Mukwevho and Celik [9] ✓✓✓ ✓ ✓✓ ✓ ✓Three-category taxonomy of fault-tolerance methods
in cloud computing environments
Amiri et al. [10] ✓✓ ✓✓ ✓✓✓ ✓ ✓Resilient and dependable approaches
in cloud networks
Nabi et al. [11] ✓✓✓ ✓✓ ✓ ✓✓ ✓✓Availability strategies and fault tolerance mechanisms
in cloud computing networks
Cherrared et al. [12] ✓ ✓✓ ✓✓ ✓ ✓Fault management issues and approaches
in NFV-based architectures
Gonzalez et al. [13] ✓✓✓ ✓ ✓ ✓✓ ✓Focus on the NFV Orchestrator dependability,
with principles for its robust planning
Mijumbi et al. [14] ✓ ✓✓✓ ✓✓✓ ✓✓ ✓Research challenges in NFV-based systems
including reliability and availability aspects
Azadiabad et al. [15] ✓✓✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓✓Availability, reliability, and continuity challenges
in NFV architectures
Fonseca and Mota [16] ✓✓✓ ✓✓ ✓✓ ✓✓✓ ✓Fault tolerance issues in SDN-based architectures
and network management approaches
Yu et al. [17] ✓✓ ✓✓ ✓✓✓ ✓✓ ✓Systematic classification of SDN faults
and network reliability issues
Nguyen et al. [18] ✓ ✓✓ ✓✓ ✓✓✓ ✓Deployment and reliability issues into
SDN/NFV mobile core networks
Kaur et al. [19] ✓ ✓✓✓ ✓✓✓ ✓✓ ✓Availability issues in SFCs
and research challenges for SFCs deployment
This work ✓✓✓ ✓✓✓ ✓✓✓ ✓✓✓ ✓✓✓Reliability/availability modeling and taxonomy in virtualized networks
balanced with tutorial-like explanation of techniques,
discussion on ETSI standards and available software tools
III. B RIEF OVERVIEW ON NETWORK FUNCTION
VIRTUALIZATION AND CONNECTED PARADIGMS
To improve accessibility to the content of the following
Section, we provide here an overview on the standard ETSI
NFV architecture along with the main connected paradigms.
A unified vision is offered in Fig. 3, where the standard
ETSI NFV architecture is depicted on the left part, and whose
main blocks are summarized as follows (more accurate details
are available in [20]). The Network Function Virtualization
Infrastructure (NFVI) block contains both physical resources
(e.g. computing units, storage, network) and virtual resources
(virtual machines) connected via the virtualization layer (the
hypervisor). On top of this block are located the VNFs
which represent the individual network functionalities to be
virtualized (e.g., routers, firewalls, load balancers, intrusion
detection systems, etc.). The VNF instances are supervised
by the Element Management Systems (EMS) which account
for operations including fault configuration, accounting, per-
formance, security management. On top of EMS/VNF block
there is the Operations/Business Support System (OSS/BSS)
playing the role of an operator back-end in charge of han-
dling services, customers, etc. The NFV Management and
Orchestration (MANO) is a crucial part of the architecture and
includes:𝑖)an Orchestrator in charge of managing the lifecycle
of network services (including instantiation, scale-out/in, per-
formance measurements, etc.), 𝑖𝑖)a VNF manager (VNFM)
in charge of managing the lifecycle of VNFs, and 𝑖𝑖𝑖)a
Virtualized Infrastructure Manager (VIM) aimed at controlling
the NFVI compute, storage, and network resources. The ETSI
NFV reference architecture can serve as the basis to support
other services or paradigms such as Network Slicing, ServiceFunction Chaining, and Software Defined Networking (right
part of Fig. 3). We briefly describe these three paradigms.
A. Network Slicing (NS)
Network slicing offers a novel approach to networking,
shifting from the traditional one-size-fits-all model to a highly
flexible, agile, and customized network infrastructure [21].
At its core, network slicing enables the creation of multiple
virtual networks, or “slices” within a single (and shared)
physical network infrastructure although they are mutually
isolated and with independent control and management [22].
Remarkably, network slicing holds promise beyond the classic
realm of applications, extending its applicability to various
industries such as healthcare [23], [24], transportation [25],
[26], smart cities [27], [28], critical services [29], [30], optical
networks [31], [32].
In the top-right part of Fig. 3, two separate slices (automo-
tive slice and IoT slice) are governed by two separate groups
of nodes:𝑖)the Access and Mobility Management Function
(AMF) node, which handles operations such as registration/de-
registration procedures of UEs, connection management, mo-
bility management to ensure that UEs are always reachable
and available; 𝑖𝑖)the Session Management Function (SMF)
node, responsible for operations such as creating and updating
Protocol Data Unit (PDU) sessions to provide end-to-end user
connectivity, allocating IP addresses, enforcing QoS policies
during session establishment; and 𝑖𝑖𝑖)the User Plane Function
(UPF) node, serving as the anchor point for data packets and
responsible for routing and forwarding operations. Interest-
ingly, such nodes can be realized as VNFs and benefit from
the flexibility offered by the NFV paradigm.
--- Seite 7 ---
7
OpenFlowSwitchSDNController
VirtualizedAntennaData NetworkVirtualizedRouterVirtualizedFirewallVirtualized VPN ConcentratorInternetSFC #1
VirtualizedSGVirtualizedPGSFC #2
Automotive SliceIoT SliceAMFSMFUPF
AMFSMFUPF
EMS1EMS2EMS3VNF1VNF2VNF3VirtualComputeVirtualStorageVirtualNetworkPhysicalComputePhysicalStoragePhysicalNetworkVirtualization LayerNetwork Function Virtualization Infrastructure OSS/BSSService, VNF, and infrastructure descriptionVNFManagerVirtualizedInfrastructureManagerOrchestrationOs-MaSe-MaVe-Vnfm
Nf-ViOr-VnfmVi-VnfmOr-ViNFV Management &Orchestration (MANO)NetworkSlicingService FunctionChainingSoftware DefinedNetworkingETSI NFV Reference Architecture
Fig. 3: The standard ETSI-NFV architecture (on the left) with main connected paradigms, including: network slicing
(top-right part), service function chaining (middle-right part), software defined networking (bottom-right part).
Remarkably, addressing availability and reliability in net-
work slicing is vital to enable the coexistence of virtual
networks with diverse requirements on a shared physical
infrastructure. For instance, designing fault-tolerance strategies
for the physical layer is crucial to prevent common faults
in the slices that reside on top [33]. Additionally, ensuring
high availability and reliability within each slice is essential
to meet distinct service level agreements (SLAs) and QoS
demands [34], [35].
B. Service Function Chaining (SFC)
This paradigm enables the creation of dynamic chains of
network services to fulfill specific application requirements
[36]. In SFCs, service functions (SFs) such as firewalls, load
balancers, or intrusion detection systems can be orchestrated
and sequenced to form customizable service chains tailored
to the unique needs of each application flow. Obviously, the
NFV standard architecture and the SFC concept are strongly
interconnected. Leveraging the functionalities offered by NFV-
MANO, it is possible to arrange the VNFs to build specific
SFCs and dynamically composing different services. In the
exemplary scenario shown in the mid-right part of Fig. 3, two
SFCs are drawn. The first one (SFC #1) represents a classic
chain that can be used to support access to a data network,
including a series of virtualized nodes, as a virtualized router
in charge of forwarding data towards specific destinations, a
virtualized firewall aimed at controlling/blocking some unde-
sired traffic, and a virtualized VPN concentrator to handle
Virtual Private Networks. The second one (SFC #2) is a chainin charge to manage cellular traffic and is composed by: a
virtualized antenna (where many functions are realized com-
pletely in software according to the Software Defined Radio
paradigm), a virtualized Serving Gateway (SG) to forward
and route packets to and from the antenna, and a virtualized
Packet Gateway (PG) acting as interface between the cellular
network and other packet data networks. All the virtualized
nodes of both SFCs can be managed through the standard NFV
architecture, thus highlighting the interconnections between
the NFV and SFC paradigms.
In Sect. VI, we will see that many works deal with reliabil-
ity/availability aspects of SFCs, since a failure or a disruption
of a single “block” of the chain may lead to a malfunctioning
of the whole SFC.
C. Software Defined Networking (SDN)
Software Defined Networking (SDN) refers to a networking
paradigm aimed at separating control plane ( routing process)
from the data plane ( forwarding process) in network devices,
thus centralizing network control and enabling programmable
network management. Specifically, the control plane has a
direct control on the state of network elements involved
in the data plane (i.e., switches, routers etc.) [37] through
some Application Programming Interfaces (APIs). Two basic
elements are recognized into the SDN architecture [38]: the
controller , which handles the control logic, and the switches ,
which execute the control logic. The idea is that a controller
can instruct the switches with customized rules embodying
new routing protocols, new addressing schemes or innovative
--- Seite 8 ---
8
security models. In the bottom-right part of Fig. 3, an SDN
controller controls 4switches through the OpenFlow protocol.
Although SDN was conceived before NFV and was referring
to controlling physical switches, two interesting facts should
be taken into account in terms of integration with virtualized
networks. First, the SDN controller is considered to be a mod-
ule of the VIM of the ETSI NFV architecture. This possibility
is explicitly envisaged in [39], where SDN controller function-
alities can be merged with the VIM functionalities such that
the two functions are not distinguishable. Second, OpenFlow
switches can be implemented as virtualized components and
treated as VNFs, thus they can be managed by the NFV-
MANO in a scalable way.
In Sect. VI, we will see that reliability and availability
aspects in SDN environments are particularly focused on the
SDN controller. Any failure or downtime in the SDN con-
troller, in fact, can lead to network disruptions, compromised
performance, and potential security vulnerabilities.
IV. R ELIABILITY , AVAILABILITY ,AND CONNECTED
ATTRIBUTES
One of the earliest attempts to provide a taxonomy of
concepts such as availability and reliability applied to com-
puter science is credited to Avizienis et al. [7]. In this work,
dependability serves as a comprehensive umbrella term, encap-
sulating essential attributes as shown in Fig. 4. An explanatory
definition of dependability provided in [7] is the following: the
dependability of a system is the ability to avoid service failures
that are more frequent and more severe than is acceptable .
In this context, a system can be: a single component (e.g., a
VNF), an ensemble of components (e.g., an SFC), a complex
infrastructure (e.g., the NFV-MANO governing a whole SFC).
In our work we focus on availability and reliability, which
are considered the most relevant attributes when evaluating
system behavior in virtualized environments, especially where
uptime, failover mechanisms, and redundancy are critical.
Moreover, being availability and reliability officially recog-
nized as standardized metrics (see next Section), for these two
attributes we provide both definitions from [7] and from ETSI
standard documents. According to ETSI [40], availability is
defined as the capability of a component to be in a state
to perform a required function or service at a given time.
This definition is coherent with the definition of availability
in [7] defined as the readiness for correct service . Similarly,
ETSI [40] defines reliability as the probability that a compo-
nent can perform a required function or service for a given
time interval, whereas the definition in [7] is the continuity
of correct service . As for the other attributes, in [7] safety
is defined as “absence of catastrophic consequences on the
user(s) and the environment”, confidentiality is defined as the
“absence of unauthorized disclosure of information”, integrity
is defined as the “absence of improper system alterations”,
and maintainability is defined as the “ability to undergo
modifications and repairs”.
As observed in [6], dependability can be defined as a qual-
itative property, namely the aptitude of a system to conform
to user expectations and to design specifications. Nonetheless,
DependabilityAvailabilityReliabilityMaintainabilitySafetyConfidentialityIntegrityFig. 4: Availability and Reliability as attributes of
Dependability according to the taxonomy in [7].
TimeTime-to-Repair(TTR1)Time-to-Failure(TTF1)TTR2TTF2RepairFailure
Mean Time to Failure (MTTF) = Mean(TTF1, TTF2, …, TTFn)Mean Time to Repair (MTTR) = Mean(TTR1, TTR2, …, TTRn)
Fig. 5: Mean Time to Failure (MTTF) and
Mean Time to Repair (MTTR).
it is important to precisely quantify availability and reliability
attributes through specific mathematical techniques.
A. Useful definitions
A fundamental difference between availability and reliabil-
ity is that availability takes into account both failure and repair
processes, whereas reliability characterizes the failure process
of a component or of a system. Moreover, the availability
concept is often considered when a system operates during
its regime condition. In such a case we refer to the steady-
state availability . Typically, a (virtualized) system is analyzed
by breaking it down into its constituent repairable compo-
nents, i.e. components characterized by alternating cycles of
uptime periods (time-to-failures) and downtime periods (time-
to-repair) as illustrated in Fig. 5. Thus, the average duration
of time to failure is called Mean Time to Failure (MTTF),
whereas the average duration of time to repair is called Mean
Time to Repair (MTTR). The steady-state availability is the
probability that the system is working in regime condition
computed as
𝐴=Uptime
Uptime + Downtime=MTTF
MTTF+MTTR. (1)
Conversely, the reliability of a system is defined as the proba-
bility that the system has not failed after a time period 𝑡. Under
the assumption that failure times are exponentially distributed
--- Seite 9 ---
9
with a parameter known as failure rate, 𝜆=1/𝑀𝑇𝑇𝐹 , the
reliability is:
𝑅(𝑡)=𝑒−𝜆𝑡=𝑒−𝑡
𝑀𝑇𝑇𝐹. (2)
The exponential assumption is very common in many practical
reliability problems due to the memoryless property, meaning
that the probability of a system failing within a certain time
period is independent of how long it has already operated
before that time period. This property aligns well with many
real-world scenarios where failures occur randomly and are
not influenced by the past history of the system. Moreover,
the exponential distribution has a simple mathematical form,
characterized by a single parameter 𝜆which is supposed to be
constant. This assumption stems from the fact that, in many
cases, we are interested to evaluate the reliability during the
useful life of a component where the failure rate 𝜆can be
assumed to be constant. Figure 6 shows the so-called bathtub
curve , which represents the typical life cycle of a component
(including the virtualized ones) where three zones can be
recognized: the infant mortality zone, where failures usually
occur due to design issues, deployment issues, and/or initial
configuration issues; the useful lifetime zone, representing
the steady-state behavior of a component, where failures are
typically due to hidden issues (e.g. software bugs) and occur at
normal and low rate; the wear out zone, where the increasing
failure rate is due to the natural aging of components (e.g.,
software not adequately updated).
B. Quantitative evaluation
We have seen that to characterize availability and reliability
attributes we need to evaluate failure and repair quantities.
In virtualized networks, examples of failures include: VNF
malfunctioning, crash of the hypervisor, unreachability of an
SFC element, and many others. In contrast, examples of
repairs include: VNF reboots, resource reallocation, repairman
intervention, and many others. In real-world deployments, the
evaluation of failures and repairs may be not trivial due to a
number of constraints (real data not available, systems not
physically accessible, etc.) Accordingly, two approaches to
obtain failure and repair information are described in [6]. The
first approach is referred to as measurement-based evaluation ,
and consists in gathering failure/repair information from the
observation of a system both during its normal functioning
and under controlled test conditions. When it is not possible
to test a system directly on the field, we can operate within an
emulated environment or through accelerated tests. The latter
refers to tests in which the stress levels are chosen to exceed
standard operational conditions so as to observe the system
failures in a shorter time frame. This approach has a series of
benefits including: 𝑖)efficiency and speed , as emulated envi-
ronments and accelerated tests allow for the rapid simulation
of various failure scenarios and repair procedures; 𝑖𝑖)cost-
effectiveness , as setting up and running emulated environments
or accelerated tests is often more cost-effective compared
to conducting experiments in a live production network; 𝑖𝑖𝑖)
controlled environment , as emulated environments provide
a controlled setting where specific failure scenarios can be
induced systematically (in this case we refer to fault injection
Useful LifetimeInfantMortalityWear outTimeFailure RateDecreasingFailure RateIncreasingFailure RateConstantFailure RateFig. 6: The bathtub curve with three zones. Typically, the
central zone models the behavior of a component during its
useful lifetime with a constant failure rate 𝜆.
techniques); 𝑖𝑣)reproducibility , as emulated environments
and accelerated tests offer the advantage of reproducibility,
enabling researchers and engineers to repeat experiments con-
sistently to validate results or conduct comparative analyses.
This approach is typically discarded when the cost associated
to set up the emulated environment is high, or when the
considered system is in a very early stage of its lifetime.
The second approach is referred to as model-based eval-
uation , and involves a mathematical abstraction of a system
with the aim to provide a simplification of its behavior. Two
phases can be recognized in this approach. First, a modeling
phase that consists in building an abstraction of the system
preserving its main characteristics. During this phase, the
designer should choose an appropriate formal language to
describe the model. Then, a solution phase that consists in
solving the system model through specific analytical or simu-
lative methods aimed at evaluating the quantities of interest. In
general, the model-based evaluation approach is faster and less
expensive than the measurement-based evaluation approach,
but produces less accurate results.
V. S TANDARDIZATION EFFORTS
The standardization process plays a crucial role in defining
metrics for measuring availability and reliability in network
virtualization. By establishing consistent and universally ac-
cepted guidelines, standards ensure that different systems
and solutions can be compared and evaluated on a common
basis. In network virtualization, where various vendors and
technologies coexist, standardized metrics allow for objective
assessment and benchmarking of performance, enabling stake-
holders to make informed decisions.
A. The “nines” metric
We recall that a highly available system is a system with a
low probability of breaking down (high reliability) and a high
probability of being quickly repaired (high maintainability).
This also justifies the choice of the availability as an evaluation
metric into the industrial field, where the number of nines
--- Seite 10 ---
10
TABLE II: Common steady-state availability values expressed
in terms of number of nines .
Availability Downtime/Year Downtime/Month Downtime/Week Downtime/Day
99.999% 5.26 minutes 0.438 minutes 0.101 minutes 0.014 minutes
99.995% 26.28 minutes 2.19 minutes 0.505 minutes 0.072 minutes
99.990% 52.56 minutes 4.38 minutes 1.011 minutes 0.144 minutes
99.950% 4.38 hours 21.9 minutes 5.054 minutes 0.72 minutes
99.900% 8.76 hours 43.8 minutes 10.108 minutes 1.44 minutes
99.500% 43.8 hours 3.65 hours 50.538 minutes 7.2 minutes
99.250% 65.7 hours 5.475 hours 75.808 minutes 10.8 minutes
99.000% 87.6 hours 7.3 hours 101.077 minutes 14.4 minutes
is chosen as a standardized benchmark [41] as also high-
lighted by ETSI [40]. For example, the five nines availability
(99.999% or high availability) benchmark means that a system
can tolerate a maximum yearly downtime of about five minutes
and 15 seconds (see Table II).
The necessity of reaching five nines availability for virtu-
alized network infrastructures stems from several compelling
factors. First, as businesses increasingly rely on digital ser-
vices to drive revenue and productivity, any downtime or
service disruption can have significant financial implications.
For industries such as finance, healthcare, and e-commerce,
where real-time transactions and data exchange are critical,
even a few minutes of downtime can lead to substantial
revenue losses and damage to brand reputation. Secondly, the
interconnected nature of applications and services amplifies
the impact of network outages or performance degradation. A
failure in one part of the network can cascade across multiple
services, affecting users, applications, and business processes.
In virtualized environments, where network functions are
dynamically instantiated and interconnected, the risk of such
cascading failures becomes more pronounced, underscoring
the importance of robust availability measures.
B. The role of ETSI
In the last decade, many agencies in charge of defining
globally applicable standards for ICT systems have devoted
efforts to define standard guidelines for high availability of
virtualized networks. In particular, ETSI has released a set of
technical documents (identified by the common acronym ETSI
NFV-REL) which define specifications, guidelines, techniques,
use cases related to the reliability and availability of virtualized
networks. In this section, we will provide details on the most
relevant ETSI documents.
According to ETSI GS NFV-REL 001 guidelines [40], NFV
service availability is provided by the result of accessibility
andadmission control . Accessibility is defined as the ability of
a service to access the (physical) resources needed to provide
that service. As shown in Fig. 7, if the target service satisfies
a minimum level of accessibility, it is possible to provide
this service to end users. Admission control refers to the
administrative decision (managed by the operators) to actually
provide that service. To offer a more stable and reliable
service, admission control may require better performance
and/or additional resources than the minimum required to
provide the service. Figure 7 depicts the TTF intervals when
Acceptable levelfor admissionMinimum levelof accessibilityService Availability
TimeService available time (TTF)Restoration time (TTR)Fig. 7: NFV Service availability as interpreted by ETSI GS
NFV-REL 001 [40].
the service is not available due to either lack of accessibility or
admission control. In the ETSI GS NFV-REL 001 document,
three main factors that may affect service availability are
highlighted:
•Service Type: different service types can have different
accessibility requirements, such as: 𝑖)network control
traffic (e.g., control plane traffic), 𝑖𝑖)real-time services
(e.g., V oIP, V oLTE, interactive services), 𝑖𝑖𝑖)data services
(e.g., transactional services and messaging), 𝑖𝑣)ISP ser-
vices (e.g., Web browsing, e-mail).
•Customer Agreements : specific Government regulatory
demands can impact service availability requirements.
Examples include: 𝑖)emergency telecommunication ser-
vices (allowing Governments to activate critical proce-
dures in response to severe disaster situations such as
calamities, terrorist attacks, etc.), 𝑖𝑖)human life and safety
services (e.g., air traffic control, railroad signalling, etc.),
𝑖𝑖𝑖)regional 112/911/119 etc. (local emergency service
allowing to contact authorities requesting assistance).
•Availability Factors and Relevant Standards : even if op-
erators design their networks to satisfy all the availability
requirements, some unpredictable conditions may happen,
including congestion conditions (e.g., large bursts of
traffic may flood network resources), or failure conditions
implying to design accurate redundancy strategies and
restoration priority policies.
Moreover, borrowing some fundamental concepts from clas-
sic literature (see, e.g., [7]) and adapting them to the NFV , in
the ETSI GS NFV-REL 001 document, the so-called Fault→
Error→Failure chain is introduced. Then, a set of issues that
can activate faults are pinpointed: 𝑖)malicious attacks from
cyber-criminals against the service or the system, including
attacks against VNFs, VNFM, VIM, Orchestrator; 𝑖𝑖)large-
scale disasters causing hardware disruption including NFVI
components; 𝑖𝑖𝑖)unusual (but legitimate) traffic which exceeds
the current system capabilities; 𝑖𝑣)environmental challenges
including wireless channel interference, increased temperature;
𝑣)failure of a dependent system or service such as a VIM
malfunctioning that can negatively affect the Orchestrator; 𝑣𝑖)
accidents and/or mistakes including systems misconfigurations
--- Seite 11 ---
11
or bad policies specifications.
Due to the nested structure of NFV-based elements, some
considerations onto VNF failure modes are drawn into the
ETSI GS NFV-REL 001 document. Depending on the type
of VNF deployment, in fact, the impact of failure may vary,
and different restoration methods may be implemented. In
Fig. 8, some possible VNF deployment options are shown.
In case all the layers (virtual machine, hypervisor, hardware)
are shared between the two VNFs on top (Fig. 8, left panel), a
failure on any of the shared resource impacts on both VNFs.
In case hypervisor and hardware are shared (but not the two
different VMs - see Fig. 8, middle panel), a common failure on
hypervisor and/or hardware will affect the VNFs functioning.
In contrast, a failure only onto one of the two VMs will just
affect the corresponding VNF. Finally, new failure modes are
introduced in case a single VNF is spanned across physical
and virtual resources (see Fig. 8, right panel). In this case, it
is enough that a single layer (or sub-layer) fails to cause a
service failure of the VNF on top.
Moreover, in the ETSI GS NFV-REL 001 document, some
crucial requirements are identified:
•A VNF needs to ensure the availability of its part of the
end-to-end service.
•The VNF designer must define the requirements of the
NFVI, such as geo-redundancy requirements.
•The NFV-MANO function shall provide the necessary
mechanisms to recreate VNF automatically after a failure.
•The NFV-MANO function shall support failure notifica-
tion mechanisms at run time.
•Failures in the NFVI shall be handled (i.e., detection) in
the NFVI layer or in the NFV-MANO (e.g., hardware
failure, loss of connectivity, etc.).
•The NFVI shall provide the necessary functionality to
enable high availability at the VNF level, such as failure
notification and remediation.
ETSI GS NFV-REL 002 document [42] provides a discussion
on how to exploit scalability in NFV environments to achieve
high availability (HA). The usage of scalable architectures
involves:𝑖)distribution of functionalities across multiple
locations;𝑖𝑖)duplication of functionalities across different
locations such that failure in one location does not impact
the processing of services; 𝑖𝑖𝑖)load balancing such that a
given network location does not experience heavier loads than
others;𝑖𝑣)managing dynamically the VNFs through horizontal
scaling, i.e. scale-in (reducing the connected resources to
optimize efficiency or reduce costs) and scale-out (increasing
the connected resources to handle increased workload or
demand).
ETSI GS NFV-REL 003 document [43] provides formal
definitions, models, and techniques to address availability
issues of virtualized infrastructures. This report introduces the
formal definitions of steady-state availability and reliability
exactly as provided in (1) and (2), respectively. Then, formulas
and techniques to evaluate the reliability and the availability
of systems made of many sub-components (as in the case
of virtualized structures) are provided. For instance, service
chains can be seen as softwarized structures with several
software modules connected in series, where starting from the
HYPERVISORVMVNF 1 VNF 2 HARDWAREHYPERVISORVM 1VNF 1 VNF 2 HARDWAREVM 2HYPERVISOR 1VM 1VNFHARDWARE 1VM 2HYPERVISOR 2VM 3HARDWARE 2Fig. 8: Three different deployment options for VNFs:
all-shared resources (left), shared hypervisor and hardware
(middle), VNF spanning across multiple physical/virtual
resources (right).
availability of each single module, it is possible to evaluate
the availability of the whole chain. More details about these
aspects will be provided in Sect. VI-A with the introduction
of the Reliability Block Diagram (RBD) formalism. The ETSI
GS NFV-REL 003 document also focuses on some practical
redundancy/protection solutions for VNFs including active-
standby (the primary VNF works and the secondary serves
as backup), active-active (both primary and secondary VNFs
work simultaneously), load balancing (the load is distributed
between the two VNFs). ETSI GS NFV-REL 003 also ad-
dresses the problem of VNFs software upgrading, as this
procedure is similar to a failure which makes the system
unavailable for a certain time period.
ETSI GS NFV-REL 004 report [44] focuses on possible
procedures to perform active monitoring of an NFV infras-
tructure. In particular, three monitoring entities are mentioned:
thevirtual test agent (provided by OSS/BSS via NFVO), i.e.,
a software entity in charge of providing failure and logging
messages, the test controller , in charge of managing the test
agents and providing them test instructions, the test results
analysis module in charge of analyzing the collected logs. The
two latter modules should be managed by the OSS/BSS of the
ETSI NFV architecture. Moreover, the document mentions the
fault injection as a simulation technique allowing to evaluate
the resilience of NFV-based infrastructures by deliberately
introducing faults.
ETSI GS NFV-REL 006 [45] focuses onto maintaining NFV
service availability and continuity upon software modification.
In particular, some interesting use cases are considered such as
stateless VNF upgrade, stateful VNF upgrade, VNF software
upgrade, network service update with simultaneous software
upgrade of multiple VNF instances.
ETSI GR NFV-REL 007 [46] mainly describes the role of
the NFV-MANO in ensuring VNFs resiliency from their in-
stantiation through their operation and recovery from failures.
Based on the type of failure, the MANO should provide appro-
priate recovery or remediation such as VNF re-instantiation/re-
creation, VNF scaling (i.e., adding a VNF instance to provide
more capacity so that the service is not degraded), VNF
migration (i.e., moving the VNF to another server during
maintenance or hardware failures), or failure containment (i.e.,
keep it from propagating further and negatively impact other
VNFs), while ensuring service continuity.
ETSI GR NFV-REL 010 [33] covers aspects related to
resilience issues of network slices. A set of recommendations
--- Seite 12 ---
12
AnalyzedFormalismsNon-State SpaceReliability Block Diagrams (RBDs)Fault Trees (FTs)
State SpaceContinuous-Time Markov Chains (CTMCs)Markov Reward Models (MRMs)Multi-State Systems (MSSs)Stochastic Markovian
Stochastic Non-MarkovianPetri-based Stochastic Petri Nets (SPNs)Generalized Stochastic Petri Nets (GSPNs)Stochastic Activity Nets (SANs)Stochastic Reward Nets (SRNs)
Multi-levelSemi-Markov Processes (SMPs)Markov Regenerative Processes (MRGPs)Phase-Type Expansion (PTE)
Fig. 9: Taxonomy of formalisms used to model reliability and availability aspects in virtualized networks [6].
is provided for the deployment of a network service where
multiple slices are involved and share the same underlying
infrastructure. For instance, the overload of one network slice
instance should not impact the performance of the other slice
instances, and the failure of one network slice instance should
not cause operation anomalies onto other slices.
ETSI GR NFV-REL 014 [47] focuses on the study of
reliability aspects for supporting the management of cloud-
native VNFs, namely VNFs deployed in a container-based
environment where new elements are present. One of these
is Kubernetes, an open-source container orchestration system
that holds significant promise as platform to guarantee system
reliability, as it is responsible for automating deployment,
scaling, and management of containerized applications.
While the ETSI NFV-REL standards, summarized in Ta-
ble III, offer foundational guidelines for addressing availabil-
ity and reliability in virtualized network environments, they
fall short in providing comprehensive, formal specifications
for these critical aspects. The standards touch upon certain
formalisms, such as RBDs, but do not delve into detailed
methodologies or endorse specific modeling tools to effec-
tively analyze and ensure reliability and availability. This gap
necessitates a deeper exploration of methods and tools that
can be employed to model and evaluate the resilience of
NFV architectures. Hence, in the next section we provide
a description of methods and formalisms (without excessive
mathematical details) that can be profitably exploited to modelTABLE III: ETSI NFV-REL documents and their main focus.
ETSI Document Brief Description
ETSI GS NFV-REL 001 [40] Definitions, failure causes and modes,
factors affecting service availability
ETSI GS NFV-REL 002 [42] Scalability and High Availability
ETSI GS NFV-REL 003 [43] Models and techniques for end-to-end
reliability and availability, redundancy,
protection, software upgrade
ETSI GS NFV-REL 004 [44] Active monitoring and failure detection,
fault injection
ETSI GS NFV-REL 006 [45] Maintaining service availability and
continuity upon software modification
ETSI GR NFV-REL 007 [46] Role and capabilities of NFV-MANO
for ensuring VNF resiliency, availabil-
ity, recovery, migration
ETSI GR NFV-REL 010 [33] Resiliency for network slicing and slice
isolation
ETSI GR NFV-REL 014 [47] Reliability for cloud-native, container-
ized VNFs
and analyze availability and reliability in virtualized networks.
VI. M ODELING FORMALISMS AND SELECTED
REFERENCES
This section aims to investigate the taxonomy (borrowed
by a milestone work on reliability and availability engineer-
ing [6]) of the most common formalisms used to model avail-
ability/reliability in the field of virtualized network infrastruc-
tures (see Fig. 9). The choice of the most suitable formalism
--- Seite 13 ---
13
to employ highly depends on the particular virtualized system
or component to model, and can be guided by various factors
including:𝑖)complexity of the system to model, 𝑖𝑖)fault/repair
data available, 𝑖𝑖𝑖)familiarity of the modeler with the particular
formalism.
The modeling formalisms can be classified as:
•Non-state-space models : these models can be quickly
solved with the assumptions that components are sta-
tistically independent. While they offer high analytical
tractability by not requiring the generation of an under-
lying state space, their modeling capability is limited due
to the exclusion of dependencies.
•State-space models : these models have the capability to
incorporate statistical dependencies, as well as depen-
dencies on state and time, thus exhibiting significant
modeling capacity. However, they tend to have lower
analytical tractability due to the curse of dimensionality.
State-space approaches are generally categorized into
Markovian (homogeneous and non-homogeneous) and
non-Markovian methods.
•Multi-level models : these models combine both state-
space and non-state-space models benefiting from the
modeling power of the former and from the efficiency
of the latter.
Along with each formalism we provide a set of pertinent
references in the field of virtualization technologies.
By organizing the literature in this manner, readers can eas-
ily map which formalisms are best suited to address particular
challenges and characteristics inherent to virtualized architec-
tures, thereby streamlining the process of finding relevant and
effective modeling techniques.
We start with the description of Non-state-space models
in subsection VI-A and VI-B. Then, we describe State-space
models in subsections from VI-C to VI-J, and Multi-level
models in subsection VI-K.
A. Reliability Block Diagrams (RBDs)
Reliability block diagrams are formally described in the
international standard IEC 1078, where RBD is defined as
a representation useful to capture the logical connections of
components necessary for the system to function successfully.
At any given moment, a component is considered to be in one
of two states: operational or faulty. Each block in the diagram
represents a component or a subsystem, and the connections
between blocks depict the logical flow. When dealing with the
RBD methodology, three typical configurations are possible
(see Fig. 10):
•Series configuration : all components must function for
the system to succeed. The system fails if any single
component fails, making it highly sensitive to individual
component reliability. Blocks are connected end-to-end
in a single path. The overall system availability is the
product of the availabilities of all individual components
(see Fig. 10 - (top panel)).
•Parallel configuration : the system can succeed as long
as at least one component functions. This setup provides
redundancy, improving overall system reliability. Blocks
1C11C21C31C11C21C3𝐴!"#$"!=𝐴%!×𝐴%"×𝐴%#𝐴&'#'(("(=1	−[(1−𝐴%!)×(1 −𝐴%")×(1 −	𝐴%#)]C11C12C13C21C22n=3, k=2n=2, k=1Block 1Block 2𝐴!"#$%&=#𝑛𝑖𝐴'(1−𝐴)()'('*%𝐴)*+,-*+.*/=𝐴0(+123Hps: availability of each subcomponent C amounts to An=3, k=2𝐴!"#$%+=#𝑛𝑖𝐴'(1−𝐴)()'('*%n=2, k=1Fig. 10: Reliability Block Diagrams (RBDs) for various
configurations: series (top panel), parallel (middle panel),
𝑘-𝑜𝑢𝑡-𝑜𝑓-𝑛(bottom panel).
are connected in parallel paths that converge at the end.
The system availability is the probability that at least one
component does not fail (see Fig. 10 - (middle panel)).
•k-out-of-n configuration : the system succeeds if at least 𝑘
out of𝑛components are operational. This configuration
provides a balance between series and parallel systems,
offering partial redundancy. Blocks can be visualized
as forming groups, with the system requiring a specific
number of operational blocks for success. The probability
that exactly𝑘components out of 𝑛are operational follows
a binomial distribution (see Fig. 10 - (bottom panel)).
Due to its high level of abstraction, this formalism is widely
used to model virtualized systems in terms of logical blocks.
Authors in [48] propose an RBD formalization to perform
a reliability assessment of a virtual data center (VDC) into
a cloud computing architecture. Since the VDC can be seen
as a series of network components, its overall reliability is
analyzed through a nested series-parallel RBD configuration
with the outer RBD modeling the connection of clusters (set
of cloud servers), and the inner RBD modeling more specific
virtualized resources. A pictorial representation of the VDC
cloud RBD model is shown in Fig. 11, where 𝑛clusters are
connected in series, whereas 𝑚cloud servers in parallel form
each cluster. Through this representation, the availability of
the overall VDC can be easily calculated by using series and
parallel RBD formulas. Denoting by 𝐴𝐶𝑙𝑢𝑖the availability of a
generic (𝑖-th) cluster, and by 𝐴𝐶𝑆𝑗the availability of a generic
(𝑗-th) cloud server, we can use the RBD parallel formula to
derive the availability of a generic cluster as:
𝐴𝐶𝑙𝑢𝑖=1−𝑚Ö
𝑗=1(1−𝐴𝐶𝑆𝑗), (3)
and the RBD series formula to derive the availability of the
--- Seite 14 ---
14
CloudServer11CloudServer1mCloudServer21CloudServer2mCloudServern1CloudServernmCluster1Cluster2Clustern
Fig. 11: Reliability Block Diagram (RBD) representation of
a virtual data center (VDC) [48].
overall VDC as:
𝐴𝑉𝐷𝐶=𝑛Ö
𝑖=1𝐴𝐶𝑙𝑢𝑖. (4)
Other works have employed the RBD methodology to char-
acterize the availability of virtualized infrastructures. In [49],
authors utilize RBD to evaluate the steady-state availability of
an SFC implemented as a chain of virtualized nodes connected
in series. Similarly, redundancy schemes to increase the overall
availability are implemented by exploiting the straightforward
rules of RBD parallel connections. The series/parallel RBD
rules are again employed in [50] to model both virtualized
and non-virtualized nodes, and to evaluate the impact on
reliability when introducing the hypervisor. Series/parallel
schemes are also used in [51] to build an availability model
of VNFs forming an SFCs, in [52] to deal with reliable
broadcasting in 5G NFV-based networks, in [53] where a novel
redundancy scheme to improve the SFC reliability is proposed,
and in [54]–[56] to characterize the SFCs in a MEC-based
environment. Authors in [57] rely on an RBD representation
to model the NFV data center components. In particular, the
authors start from a baseline data center architecture (built
through RBD), and evaluate different variants categorized per
availability importance.
Due to their ability to represent only high-level connections,
RBDs are rarely used alone but rather in conjunction with
other formalisms, allowing to capture more details, as we will
see in Sect. VI-K.
We conclude this section by highlighting some pros and
cons associated with the RBD representation.
Pros
•RBDs provide a clear and straightforward way to visual-
ize the configuration and reliability of a system, making it
easier to understand the interdependencies of components.
•RBDs allow for the analysis of individual components
and their contributions to the overall system reliability
being characterized by a high degree of modularity.
•RBDs can effectively model different redundancy
configurations (e.g., series, parallel, k-out-of-n systems)
to evaluate the impact on overall system reliability.
Cons
•RBDs typically assume that component failures are statis-
tically independent, which may not be accurate in systems
with significant dependencies or common cause failures.•While RBDs can scale to complex systems, the diagrams
can become difficult to manage for very large systems
with numerous components and interactions.
•RBDs often represent components in a binary state (either
working or failed), which may oversimplify the actual
behavior of components that can degrade gradually or
have multiple failure modes.
B. Fault Trees (FTs)
A fault tree (FT) serves as a visual tool to represent the
combination of events that can cause the occurrence of a
system failure. On top of the FT there is the Top Event
(TE), which acts as a root and represents the top-level failure
that a system may reach. The construction of the FT starts
from the TE and follows a deductive reasoning, progressing
from general to specific, in a “top-down” manner. When
analyzing the various elementary events contributing to the
TE, this process is called fault tree analysis (FTA). In the FT
representation, the components of a system are represented
as nodes and can be connected through logical operators. For
instance, ORgates are used to represent components connected
in series, whereas AND gates are used to represent components
connected in parallel. Other logical operators (NOT, XOR,
etc.) are supported by the FT formalism. Accordingly, the
FT representation is particularly suited to capture dependen-
cies among components of a virtualized infrastructure. An
explanatory example is offered in Fig. 12, where an FT is
used to model a virtualized network node (see [58]) made
of two parts: the Hardware (HW) part including physical
equipment such as CPU, storage, etc., and the Software (SW)
part including the software applications (App), the Operating
System (OS), and the Hypervisor (HYP). The TE is generically
denoted as System Failure . It is straightforward to see that the
virtualized network node fails if the hardware part fails OR
the software part fails. Similarly, the hardware part fails if
the CPU fails ORthe storage fails. Likewise, the software
part fails if the application fails ORthe operating system fails
ORthe hypervisor fails. In practice, the FT representation
is useful when it is easy to break a system to model (a
virtualized network node in the example above) into its main
sub-components. Thus, it is easy to express the TE in Fig. 12
as:
𝑇𝐸=𝐶𝑃𝑈∨𝑆𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒|               {z               }
HW∨𝐴𝑝𝑝∨𝑂𝑆∨𝐻𝑌𝑃|                  {z                  }
SW, (5)
where the “∨” symbol denotes the logical 𝑂𝑅. Obviously, the
availability of the virtualized node ( 𝐴𝑉𝑁) modeled in Fig. 12
can be easily derived by applying the 𝑁𝑂𝑇 operator to the
TE, namely:
𝐴𝑉𝑁=𝑇𝐸. (6)
Notably, a reliability model for a cloud environment where
FTs are extensively used is proposed in [59]. In this work,
the authors associate the FTs to different states, where var-
ious cases (e.g., physical server available, virtual machines
available/not available, etc.) are taken into account. FTs are
exploited in [60] to model virtualized environments using a
distributed multi-agent approach. Each agent autonomously
--- Seite 15 ---
15
System Failure
HWSWCPUStorageAppOSHYPOR
Fig. 12: Fault Tree (FT) representation of a virtualized
network node [58].
evaluates the health of a virtual machine by analyzing triggered
events (errors or other occurrences) using fault trees to capture
the reliable (or unreliable) state of a system. A cloud-based
decision support system is proposed in [61], where a fault
tree analysis is applied to model some distributed industrial
applications according to the standard IEC 61499 . A fault tree
model of the 5G core network fault is advocated in [62],
where the tree is built by considering key nodes of the
5G core infrastructure including the SMF and the AMF.
Authors in [63] advance a failure-aware virtual machine (VM)
migration technique based on FTA to create a fault-tolerant
cloud data center. The method involves constructing a fault
tree to represent potential server failure events. In particular, by
analyzing the fault tree, server failures are predicted, allowing
virtual machines to be proactively migrated to alternative
servers before any failure occurs.
Again using FTA concepts, authors in [64] suggest a dis-
tributed approach where each virtualized node can assess and
predict its own health status. In their framework, each node can
proactively decide whether to accept future jobs, delegate jobs
to its replicated instances, or initiate a live migration process.
The model is then evaluated using real Xen log traces. Also
authors in [65] use FTA, in this case to monitor the health of
each host within a fault-tolerant system. VMs are proactively
migrated from less healthy hosts. The proposed methodology
is evaluated against various failure scenarios, demonstrating
superior throughput compared to state-of-the-art methods. The
work in [66] employs FTs to identify repairs and failures of
virtual machines, thereby reducing energy consumption and
costs. Remarkably, the authors consider a dynamic FTA which
incorporates temporal and dynamic aspects of the system
behavior.
Note that RBDs series and parallel connections of com-
ponents can be easily turned into the corresponding FT rep-
resentation through the usage of NOT ,AND , and ORlogical
operators. Considering again the RBD representation of VDCs
introduced in Fig. 11, the FT of a generic cluster (made of
parallel cloud servers) can be written as:
𝐶𝑙𝑢=𝐶𝑆1∧···∧𝐶𝑆𝑚, (7)where𝑋denotes the element failure (namely, element NOT
working), and the “ ∧” symbol denotes the logical AND . Thus,
it is easy to conclude that a cluster failure occurs when all
cloud servers fail. Similarly, the FT representation of the whole
VDC (meant as a series of clusters) can be written as:
𝑉𝐷𝐶 =𝐶𝑙𝑢 1∨···∨𝐶𝑙𝑢𝑛. (8)
Also in this case, it is easy to deduce that a VDC failure
(namely, VDC NOT working) occurs when one or more
clusters fail.
We finally mention a particular type of FT, namely the
fault tree with repeated events (FTRE), where one or more
events occur multiple times at different locations within the
tree structure. In a typical fault tree, each event is expected
to appear only once, representing a unique point of failure or
cause in the system being analyzed. However, in an FTRE,
some events are duplicated, appearing in various branches of
the tree. This repetition can happen due to complex dependen-
cies or interactions within the system, where the same failure
mode affects multiple parts of the system.
We conclude this section by pinpointing some pros and cons
characterizing the FT representation.
Pros
•FTs help in systematically breaking down complex sys-
tems into more manageable sub-components.
•FTs offer a visual representation of the logical rela-
tionships between different components and their failure
modes, by making it easier to understand failure pathways
and their interdependencies.
•By analyzing the FT, critical components or failure points
(i.e., those that significantly impact system reliability) can
be easily identified, thus effective maintenance strategies
can be designed.
Cons
•For large and complex systems, FTs can become very
intricate and difficult to manage.
•FTs do not easily handle partial failures which are com-
mon in real-world systems.
•Introducing repeated events increases the complexity of
the fault tree, making it harder to analyze.
C. Continuous-Time Markov Chains (CTMCs)
The Continuous-Time Markov Chain (CTMC) represents
one of the most versatile formalisms to deal with reliabil-
ity/availability concepts [6]. More in general, CTMCs are
a mathematical tool used to model systems that undergo
transitions from one state to another in a continuous time
setting. Let us consider a simple system that can be in one of
two distinct states depicted as circles as schematically shown
in Fig. 13: the state “UP” denotes a correctly working system,
whereas the state “DN” (down) denotes a failed system. The
system can move from one state to another. For instance, due
to a failure, the system might change from UP to DN state
via a transition (the directed arc from UP to DN state). Each
transition has a rate, which determines how quickly the system
is likely to move from one state to another. This rate is a
key part of what makes the model “continuous-time”. Unlike
--- Seite 16 ---
16
UP DNλ
µ
Fig. 13: A simple two-state CTMC. The system is working
when in state UP. In case of failure, the system passes to the
DN (down) state with an exponential transition ruled by 𝜆.
After a repair occurs, the system comes back to the UP state
with an exponential transition ruled by 𝜇.
discrete models where changes happen at fixed intervals, in
a CTMC, changes can happen at any moment. The time the
system spends in a state before transitioning to another state is
random, and is modeled using exponential distributions, which
means that the probability of transitioning soon is high initially
but decreases over time.
We recall that the exponential distribution has the mem-
oryless property, meaning that the future behavior of the
system only depends on its current state and not on how it
arrived there (Markov property). This simplifies analysis and
modeling. By considering the simple (two-state) CTMC model
in Fig. 13, we can see that once in state UP, after a failure
occurs, the system passes into state DN with an exponentially-
distributed time with transition rate 𝜆. Likewise, once in state
DN, after a repair occurs, the system comes back into state UP
with an exponentially-distributed time with transition rate 𝜇.
When dealing with availability and reliability aspects, in the
majority of cases (and for the sake of simplicity) such rates are
assumed to be constant over time (see, for instance, the useful
lifetime zone into the bathtub curve previously discussed in
Sect. IV), thus the CTMC is also called homogeneous CTMC.
Unless otherwise specified in the paper, the term CTMC
refers to a homogeneous CTMC. The steady-state availability
of the simple CTMC in Fig. 13 can be easily derived by
considering the so-called balance equations (also known as
the Kolmogorov forward equations [67]). The simple system
to derive the steady-state availability of the CTMC in Fig. 13
follows:
 
𝜆·𝜋𝑈𝑃=𝜇·𝜋𝐷𝑁,
𝜋𝑈𝑃+𝜋𝐷𝑁=1,(9)
where𝜋𝑈𝑃and𝜋𝐷𝑁represent the steady-state probabilities
to be in states up and down, respectively. The first equation
in (9) represents the balance equation stating that the rate at
which the system enters a given state must be equal to the rate
at which it leaves the state, whereas the second equation is a
normalization condition meaning that the sum of the steady-
state probabilities of the whole system must amount to 1. Now,
if we interpret the system steady-state availability ( 𝐴𝑠𝑦𝑠) as the
probability to be in state UP, the solution of (9) leads to:
𝐴𝑠𝑦𝑠=𝜋𝑈𝑃=𝜇
𝜆+𝜇=MTTF
MTTF+MTTR, (10)
which corresponds to the basic definition (1) since 𝜆=
1/MTTF and 𝜇=1/MTTR.
UPDNDTDWRP𝜆!"#𝛿!"#(1−𝑏)(𝛽!"#𝛼$#𝜇!"#𝑏(𝛽!"#Fig. 14: Continuous Time Markov Chain (CTMC)
representation of a hypervisor [68].
Let us explore how to better use CTMCs to model the
hypervisor, which constitutes one of the crucial elements of
virtualized networks. Such modeling is described in [68], and
the corresponding graphical representation is shown in Fig. 14.
Starting from a working condition (UP state), the model can
enter a fault condition (DN state) with rate 𝜆𝐻𝑌𝑃. After a
failure detection with rate 𝛿𝐻𝑌𝑃 the model reaches state DT,
and the hypervisor is ready to be rebooted (to recover the
failure) with rate 𝛽𝐻𝑌𝑃. With a probability 𝑏, the reboot
is successful with the model coming back to the UP state.
Conversely, with a probability ( 1−𝑏), the reboot fails and
the model enters the DW state prompting the summoning of a
repair person at rate 𝛼𝑆𝑃. The model reaches the RP state when
the repair begins and returns to the UP state upon completion
of the repair, with an MTTR amounting to 𝜇𝐻𝑌𝑃.
Other examples of works employing CTMCs to model
reliability/availability aspects of virtualized networks are pro-
vided. Authors in [69] exploit CTMCs to model the reliability
behavior of 5G base stations (BSs). Specifically, the state
of a BS can be: healthy (all parameters of BSs configured
with optimal value), sub-optimal (one or more parameters
of BSs misconfigured), outage (the BS is not working). A
highly-available load balancing scheme in an SDN scenario
is proposed in [70]. Such scheme is built through the CTMC
formalism, and is governed by a control policy which exploits
a set of horizontal scaling thresholds to fairly distribute the
network traffic between SDN controllers.
A virtualized two-node cluster recovery model in which
both software and hardware failures may occur is presented
in [71]. The Markov model of the cluster embeds different
states including active, standby, unstable, rejuvenation, VM
failure, complete failure.
The impact of rejuvenation onto a CTMC-based availability
modeling of virtualized infrastructures is analyzed also in [72],
[73]. A CTMC model to predict the rate of requests forwarded
to public cloud providers by a federation of hybrid clouds is
proposed in [74]. Each member of the federation can share
workload or resources to achieve cost savings while meeting
QoS requirements. When all members have identical QoS
requirements, authors provided theoretical results demonstrat-
ing that sharing all resources is the optimal strategy. Authors
in [75] start from the consideration that the VM migration en-
hances network robustness but also leads to service downtime
and increased end-to-end delay. Accordingly, to examine the
impact of VM failure, migration, and recovery, they define
three states for the VMs in an edge server embodied into
a CTMC structure. A survivability model of a virtualized
system after a service breakdown occurrence by relying onto
--- Seite 17 ---
17
CTMCs is presented in [76]. The virtualized system structure
includes three main components: a main host (which contains
the hypervisor running an active VM), a backup host (a
spare host replacing the main host when a VM migrates),
a management host (responsible for controlling the whole
cloud environment). Moreover, a CTMC-based modeling is
considered in [77], where the availability of multiple cluster
systems is investigated, in [78], where the authors propose
an analytical model of middle box functions in the realm of
virtualized networks, and in [79] where a Markov chain model
is employed to characterize the unavailability-aware model of
virtualized and physical backup resources.
Some pros and cons characterizing CTMCs:
Pros
•CTMCs can provide both transient and steady-state anal-
ysis, allowing for evaluation of system performance over
time and in the long run.
•CTMCs allow modeling of state-dependent behaviors
and transitions, providing a more accurate representation
of systems that have varying failure and repair rates
depending on their current state.
•Relying on solid theoretical foundation, CTMCs provide
consistent methods for analysis and prediction.
Cons
•Modeling very large systems with many states and tran-
sitions can become exceedingly complex and computa-
tionally intensive.
•CTMCs typically assume that state transitions follow
an exponential distribution, and thus sojourn times are
also exponentially distributed, which may not always be
appropriate for all systems or components.
•Solving the balance equations for large CTMCs often re-
quires numerical methods, which can be computationally
demanding and may involve approximation techniques.
D. Markov Reward Models (MRMs)
A Markov Reward Model (MRM) enhances the capabilities
of a CTMC by incorporating an attribute called a reward ,
which can be assigned to the states, the transitions, or
both [80], [81]. The reward typically corresponds to a perfor-
mance metric or a cost related to a state, or some characteristic
of the state or transition. Moreover, incorporating a reward
into CTMC models offers a cohesive framework to define and
calculate metrics that describe the system behavior relevant
to the modeler. Although MRMs have been superseded by
Stochastic Reward Nets (see Sect. VI-I) which offer greater
expressiveness and compactness, some works still use them
in the field of reliability/availability of cloud networking, as
outlined in the following. Authors in [82] introduce a per-
formability analysis of cloud computing architectures, where
MRMs are employed to get QoS measurements. MRMs are
also exploited to analytically characterize failures in VMs [83],
[84], and to characterize online cloud gaming [85], [86]. A
performance/dependability MRM-based model is developed
in [87] to design a reliable cloud radio access network able to
provide service continuity in case of baseband units failure.
Pros and cons of MRMs do not substantially change with
respect to CTMCs.E. Multi-State Systems (MSSs)
Multi-State Systems (MSSs) are models used in relia-
bility/availability engineering to represent systems that can
exist in multiple states, each reflecting different levels of
performance, capacity, or operational effectiveness. Unlike
binary-state systems, which are limited to “working” and
“failed” states, MSS can encompass a broader spectrum of
conditions, such as fully operational, partially operational, and
completely failed states [88]. This allows for a more realistic
representation of complex systems, particularly those that
degrade gradually or have multiple failure modes. Actually,
a binary system can be considered the simplest case of an
MSS having two distinguished states (perfect functioning and
complete failure) [89]. Remarkably, MSSs can be exploited in
the domain of virtualized networks, where it is common to
experience degradation with some VMs failing while others
remain operational. Similarly to the CTMCs, the reliability
and performance analyses through MSSs are conducted by
examining the probabilities of being in each state and the rates
of transitions between states. Moreover, being such structures
more complex than classic CTMCs, various approaches have
been proposed for their solution.
For example, authors in [90] and [91] adopt an approach
based on multi-valued decision diagrams (MDDs) to eval-
uate the availability of cloud resources modeled via MSSs.
MDDs are efficient graph-based data structures for symbolic
representation and manipulation of multi-valued logical func-
tions. Another approach to deal with MSSs is offered by
the Universal Generating Function (UGF) and its variants,
which provide a compact representation of the performance
distribution of multi-state systems. Instead of enumerating all
possible states and their probabilities, the UGF encapsulates
this information in a polynomial-like function, significantly
reducing the computational burden [92], [93]. A particular
variant of UGF dubbed Multi-dimensional UGF is profitably
employed in [94]–[99] to model the degradation of softwarized
nodes in presence of concurrent service providers in virtual-
ized environments. A further refinement is presented in [100]
to address an availability-aware virtual network function place-
ment. As an example, Fig. 15 shows an MSS model (including
14states) of a containerized node adopted in [96]. Such a
containerized node is represented as a classic three-layered
structure including: an infrastructure layer (embodying hard-
ware equipment), a Docker layer (embodying the container
engine), and the Application layer (embodying the offered
services through a number of containerized instances). More-
over, the containerized node is shared between two service
providers, with one having 2containerized instances and the
other having 3containerized instances, respectively. Each state
𝑆𝑖(𝑖=1,..., 12) models the working/failed behavior of
containerized instances associated to two service providers.
For instance, the state 𝑆11=(1,3)denotes that provider 1has
only 1instance working, whereas provider 2has3instances
working. It is evident that, starting from the fully operational
state𝑆12(where all containerized instances for both providers
are working), two transitions are possible: 𝑖)to state𝑆11at rate
2𝜆𝐶1, indicating that one of the two instances from provider
--- Seite 18 ---
18
S12S10S7S11S9S8S5S6S3S4S2S1SDSIp1dp2i2 C1µC1 C12µC13 C2µC22 C22µC23 C2µC22 C1µC12 C1µC12 C22µC23 C2µC2 C12µC12 C22µC2 C12µC1 C23µC22 C1µC1 C23µC2 C12µC1 C23µC2 DµIµD D IFrom allthe states(except(0,0)I)From allthe states
Fig. 15: Multi-State System (MSS) applied to a three-layered
containerized node shared between two providers [96]. Each
state represents the number of working instances for each
provider.
1may fail;𝑖𝑖)to state𝑆10at rate 3𝜆𝐶2, indicating that one of
the three instances from provider 2may fail. Conversely, the
repair rate are 𝜇𝐶1(from𝑆11to𝑆12) and𝜇𝐶2(from𝑆10to
𝑆12) as one containerized instance can be repaired (rebooted)
at a time. Moreover, states 𝑆𝐼and𝑆𝐷represent the failure of
Infrastructure and Docker layer, respectively. When the system
is in either of these states, no working containerized instances
are present, so both states have a value of (0,0).
Relevant pros and cons of the MSS formalism include:
Pros
•MSSs allow for the modeling of systems that can exist in
multiple states of performance, reflecting more realistic
scenarios of gradual degradation and partial failures.
•MSSs allow to evaluate a range of performance metrics
beyond simple reliability, including availability, maintain-
ability, and quality of service.
•Tools like UGF provide efficient computational methods
for analyzing MSSs, making it feasible to handle
complex systems.
Cons
•Similarly to CTMCs, also MSSs typically assume that
state transitions follow an exponential distribution.
•While tools like UGF help, the computational effort
needed to analyze large and complex MSSs can still be
significant, especially for systems with many components
and states.
•There are only a few ready-to-use tools supporting the
MSS-based analysis, potentially limiting the accessibility
to this formalism.F . Stochastic Petri Networks (SPNs)
Stochastic Petri Nets (SPNs) are an extension of the clas-
sical Petri net framework, incorporating stochastic (random)
elements to model and analyze systems with probabilistic
behavior. They are particularly useful in performance eval-
uation, reliability analysis, and in the study of systems where
timing and randomness play crucial roles. SPNs can be also
considered as an evolution of CTMCs since, from an SPN,
we can derive the corresponding Markov-based representation.
Before analyzing (through a practical example) the relation
between CTMCs and SPNs, it is useful to introduce some
concepts and terminology.
First of all, an SPN can be represented as a bipartite graph
containing the following elements:
•Places : represent conditions or states of the system (e.g.,
working/failed) and are depicted as circles.
•Timed Transitions : represent the actions (e.g. passing
from one place to another) typically governed by expo-
nential probability distributions. Each timed transition has
a rate parameter typically denoted by 𝜆(when passing
from a “working place” to a “failed place”), or by 𝜇
(when passing from a “failed place” to a “working place”)
which denote the exponentially distributed rate. The rate
influences how frequently the transition fires. They are
depicted as thick and unfilled rectangles.
•Tokens : reside in places and represent the presence of
a condition or the availability of a resource. They are
depicted as dots (or numbers) inside a place. A partic-
ular distribution of tokens inside the SPN is known as
marking .
•Arcs: connect places to transitions (input arcs) and transi-
tions to places (output arcs), indicating the flow between
conditions and events.
Let us consider Fig. 16 where, in the upper panel, we depict a
CTMC representation of a simple virtualized system consisting
of 2 VMs. When the system is functioning perfectly, both VMs
are operational, and the model is in the UP state. When one
VM fails, the model reaches an intermediate (INT) state of
partial functioning at rate 𝜆. Similarly, if the remaining VM
also fails, the model reaches the completely down state (DN)
at rate𝜆. The system returns to the INT state when one VM
is repaired, and to the UP state when both VMs are repaired.
This simple CTMC model can be transformed into an
“equivalent” SPN, as shown in the bottom-left panel of Fig. 16.
The two tokens in the upplace denote a fully operational
state with both VMs working. When the transition named fail
isfired, one token is transferred at rate 𝜆to the down place,
resulting in partial functionality with only one VM operational.
When also the second token in the up place is transferred to the
down place, the system has completely failed, with both VMs
non-operational. Conversely, when the transition named repis
fired, one token is transferred at rate 𝜇from the down place
back to the up place. Another firing of reptransfers the second
token from the down place to the up place. The SPN offers
a more compact representation of the CTMC, as the token
mechanism automatically incorporates the intermediate state
represented in the CTMC. Due to its flexibility, this formalism
--- Seite 19 ---
19
CTMC
GSPN2 VMs working1 VM working0 VM workingUPINTDN µµµ
𝜆𝜇
𝜆𝜇«Equivalent»SPNGSPN
Fig. 16: A CTMC (top figure) and its “equivalent” SPN
(bottom-left figure) and Generalized SPN (bottom-right
figure).
is widely used in the literature addressing reliability and
availability in virtualized networks, as outlined below. Authors
in [101] propose a new approach to assess the availability of
SFC placement by taking into account different redundancy
strategies using SPNs. In particular, they devise an algorithm
for automated generation and solving of small SPN models
for SFC availability. SPNs are used to model a virtualized
network in [102], where the authors consider heterogeneous
network load conditions. The aim is to promote the use of
virtualization technology to effectively respond to various load
conditions. SPNs are adopted also to evaluate the availability
of a virtual firewall [103] (being a critical node of a virtualized
network), to characterize a Mobile Edge Computing (MEC)
scenario and analyze its performance [104], to predict GPUs
performance in a mobile cloud environment [105], to capture
the stochastic characteristics of cloud services and translating
them into the elements of an availability model [106], to
evaluate steady-state availability during disaster recovery in
cloud-based environments [107], to evaluate the availability of
OpenStack Swift and CephFS (two popular cloud storage ser-
vices) [108], to capture performability metrics in Infrastructure
as a Service (IaaS) systems [109], to evaluate dependability
metrics in cloud data centers with focus onto the life cycle
of running VMs [110], to assess an availability planning for a
MEC system [111], and to carry on SFC reliability assessment
along with a reliability optimization algorithm [112].
A variant of SPNs is named Coloured SPNs (CSPNs),
and introduces the concept of “color” to distinguish between
different types of tokens. CSPNs are particularly useful for
systems with multiple types of resources or entities that need
to be modeled distinctly. Some works experimented CSPNs
into availability analysis of virtualized infrastructures as shown
in [113], where the authors evaluate the availability of inter and
intra-data center deployments of cloud services, in [114] wherean availability analysis involving resource utilization in cloud
computing is carried on, in [115], where the authors evaluate
the SFC availability under different elasticity strategies, and
in [116], where a resilience evaluation of 5 𝐺virtualized
networks is performed.
We conclude this section by outlining the key advantages
and disadvantages of the SPNs.
Pros
•SPNs can naturally capture system architecture with
components and dependencies, describing the interactions
between components and the stochastic nature of failures
and repairs.
•With a more compact representation of the failure/repair
behavior of components w.r.t. CTMCs, SPNs provide a
versatile tool to model complex real-world systems.
•Several software tools (see Sect. VII) are available for
creating, analyzing, and simulating SPN models, making
it easier for researchers and practitioners to apply SPNs
to real-world problems.
Cons
•The graphical nature of SPNs can make formal verifi-
cation and validation harder compared to the algebraic
representations of CTMCs.
•The analysis of SPNs, especially for large models, can be
computationally intensive. This can make it challenging
to perform detailed simulations and analyses within a
reasonable time frame.
•Transitions in SPNs follow exponential distributions,
which might not be suitable for all types of stochastic
processes. This can limit the accuracy of models where
other distributions (e.g., Weibull) are more appropriate.
G. Generalized Stochastic Petri Networks (GSPNs)
A useful generalization of SPNs, namely Generalized SPNs
(GSPNs), is introduced in [117]. Differently from standard
SPNs, GSPNs allow for another type of transitions (in addition
to time transitions) named immediate transitions which fire in
zero time once they are enabled. Such transitions, depicted
as thin filled rectangles, do not effectively contribute to the
time behavior of the system, thus they can be eliminated from
the corresponding Markov chain. A simplified version of a
GSPN is shown in the bottom-right panel of Fig. 16. This
GSPN is derived from the SPN in the same figure, with the
difference that now an immediate transition connects the up
and down places. Such a transition is useful for representing
“catastrophic” situations where, for example, the whole node
crashes, leading to the immediate failure of both VMs. This
results in the immediate transfer of the two tokens from the
up place to the down place. The introduction of immediate
transitions (present also in other formalisms, as detailed in
the following sections) allows to model a series of behaviors
frequently encountered in the domain of virtualized networks,
where nodes are often designed as “nested” structures (see
Fig. 8). It means that, as the hardware layer fails, all the layers
on top automatically fail. This behavior can be effectively
captured through the usage of immediate transitions, as shown
through a practical example in subsection VI-I. A set of works
employing GSPNs is outlined below.
--- Seite 20 ---
20
Authors in [118] evaluate the availability of VNFs in active-
standby configurations through GSPNs. The aim is to contrast
such a model with an availability evaluation algorithm based
on a network evolution model. The work in [119] leverages
GSPNs for performability evaluation of private cloud com-
puting environments that adopt NoSQL DBMS as the storage
system. Models are presented to jointly estimate throughput
and availability, being critical QoS indicators. GSPNs are
also employed to perform risk assessment of software defined
networks with the emphasis on denial of service attacks [120].
A coloured version of GSPN is also used in [121] to model
the operational process of a cloud data center, considering the
failure and resource usage of each involved node.
Pros and cons associated to GSPNs are outlined below.
Pros
•GSPNs can effectively model complex systems with
multiple components and interactions, capturing both
stochastic timing and logical dependencies.
•GSPNs introduce the immediate transitions which enable
the representation of urgent or high-priority events that
occur without delay, providing more accurate modeling
of critical failure or repair events.
•There are several established tools (see Sect. VII) that
support the construction, simulation, and analysis of
GSPNs, facilitating their practical application.
Cons
•Similarly to SPNs, also GSPNs offer less control on
formal verification and validation than CTMCs, as many
states can be hardly accessible due to the formalism
compactness.
•Effective use of GSPN tools requires familiarity with
the formalism and the specific tool’s features, which can
involve a steep learning curve for new users.
•Similarly to SPNs, timed transitions in GSPNs typically
follow exponential distributions, which might not be
suitable for all types of stochastic processes.
H. Stochastic Activity Networks (SANs)
Stochastic Activity Networks (SANs) are another powerful
modeling formalism used to describe and analyze systems
that exhibit stochastic behavior [122]. SANs are based on the
concept of activity , a stochastic event that modifies the system
state. Activities are analogous to transitions in GSPNs, since
they can be timed or instantaneous.
Remarkably, timed activities can follow a wide range of
probability distributions (e.g., exponential, uniform, normal,
etc.), providing more flexibility in modeling different types
of stochastic behavior. In contrast, similarly to the immediate
transitions in GSPNs, the instantaneous activities allow for
immediate state changes without time delay. In SANs we also
find the gates , which provide a control logic to define when
activities are enabled and how they affect the system state.
An input gate controls whether an activity is enabled, whereas
an output gate defines how the system state is updated after
an activity completes. Currently, the main limitation of such a
formalism is the scarcity of tools available (as far as we know,
the only tool available is Möbius (see Sect. VII)). Nonetheless,some authors have already exploited SANs to model reliabil-
ity/availability in virtualized environments. In [124], authors
offer an interesting perspective about the failure dynamics of
the SDN controller, where a SAN model is used to characterize
aspects such as software aging, different software failure
modes, and external failures of the operating systems and of
the underlying hardware. SANs are employed also in [125] to
assess and quantify the availability of NFV-supported services.
In [126], authors derive a high-availability model of the NFV-
MANO by characterizing it in terms of failures and repairs.
In particular, the SAN availability model of the MANO
involves a multi-layered architecture including the hardware,
the operating system, the Docker daemon, and the MANO
software, where software rejuvenation processes are taken
into account. In a further refinement [127], the same authors
include also an SDN-based infrastructure (considered as part
of the VIM), and employ SANs to perform an availability
analysis aimed at deriving useful redundancy configurations.
SANs is used also in [128] to characterize and assess the
performance and power consumption of virtualized servers in
a cloud computing environment. More specifically, through
SANs, the authors represent physical servers in three different
power consumption and provisioning delay modes. The main
idea is to leave the SAN model to decide to vertically scale
the VMs, thus helping the overall system to save power by
preserving acceptable performance.
An availability analysis of the virtualized Evolved Packet
Core (vEPC), representing one of the most interesting NFV
use cases, is performed in [129]. In particular, some crucial
nodes of the vEPC architecture (e.g., MME, S-GW, P-GW,
MANO) are separately modeled using the SAN formalism.
An evaluation of IaaS cloud data centers is proposed in [130],
where SAN modeling is employed to investigate the impact
of different characteristics on service availability. SANs are
also used in [131] to characterize the availability of some
components of a 5G-MEC system, including Radio Units,
Distributed Units, MEC hosts, etc. An availability assessment
of dispatching policies in IaaS cloud data centers is advanced
in [132] and [133], where authors propose a SAN-based
availability model of NFV-enabled network services under
different modes (Standard Availability, Cold/Hot Protection).
Some pros and cons associated to the SANs follow.
Pros
•SANs provide greater flexibility than GSPNs, as activities
allow for modeling non-Markovian systems that require
general probability distributions.
•SANs use input and output gates to control the enabling
and effects of activities, allowing detailed and complex
control over the system state changes and interactions.
•SANs naturally support hierarchical and modular mod-
eling, facilitating the construction and analysis of large,
complex systems by breaking them down into smaller,
manageable sub-models.
Cons
•Like SPNs, SANs use a graphical representation that,
while intuitive for modeling, can complicate formal val-
idation when compared to the more structured algebraic
approach of CTMCs.
--- Seite 21 ---
21
HYPERVISORVMCONTAINER
HARDWAREDOCKER
Fig. 17: Five-layer structure of a containerized node (on the left) and the corresponding SRN model (on the right) [123].
•The detailed and flexible nature of SANs can lead to very
complex models that can be difficult to design, manage,
and understand.
•Very few tools are currently available to manage SANs.
I. Stochastic Reward Networks (SRNs)
Similarly to SANs, the Stochastic Reward Networks (SRNs)
are a further refinement of GSPNs [134], [135]. The reward
concept comes from the MRMs, where a reward rate is
attached to each state of the Markov chain. In particular, SRNs
introduce the reward functions which map states or transitions
to real numbers, quantifying aspects like cost, performance,
reliability, or availability. Rewards can be accumulated over
time, providing a measure of the system behavior over its
operational lifetime. SRNs increase the modeling power of the
GSPNs by adding new elements including: guard functions,
inhibitory arcs, marking dependent arc multiplicities, general
transition priorities, and reward rates at the net level. A Guard
Function is a Boolean function associated with a transition.
The transition is considered enabled only if the guard function
is true. Similarly to the guard function, an Inhibitory Arc is
an arc which prevents a transition to be fired unless a given
condition is met. Marking dependent arc multiplicities allow
either the number of tokens required for the transition to be
enabled, or the number of tokens removed from the input
place, or the number of tokens placed in an output place to
be a function of the current marking of the model. Timed
and immediate transitions are also present in SRNs to model
actions occurring in a finite time and instantaneous events,
respectively.
To better understand how to employ the SRN formalism to
model some aspects of virtualized network infrastructures, let
us consider the SRN shown in Fig. 17. This SRN characterizes
a containerized network node made of 5nested layers [123],
starting from the lowest layer: hardware, hypervisor, virtual
machine, Docker, and container. In this structure, we can
recognize 5𝑃𝑢𝑝[𝑃𝑑𝑛] places denoting the five layers working
[failed], respectively. We also note that all the 𝑃𝑢𝑝places
contain 1token, except for the 𝑃𝑢𝑝𝐶𝑁𝑇 which contains 𝑛
tokens since the authors assume the presence of 𝑛working
containers within the node. Timed transitions are represented
as thick unfilled rectangles and denoted by 𝑇𝑓[𝑇𝑟] to encode
failure [repair] events. Immediate transitions are represented as
thin filled rectangles and denoted by 𝑡. To analyze the evolutionof this SRN it is useful to start from an initial working
condition where all containers work, namely, 𝑛tokens are in
the place𝑃𝑢𝑝𝐶𝑁𝑇 . In the event of a single container failure, the
transition𝑇𝑓𝐶𝑁𝑇 is triggered, moving a token from 𝑃𝑢𝑝𝐶𝑁𝑇
to𝑃𝑑𝑛𝐶𝑁𝑇 . In contrast, when the container is repaired, the
transition𝑇𝑟𝐶𝑁𝑇 is triggered, returning the token to 𝑃𝑢𝑝𝐶𝑁𝑇 .
This process repeats in the case of multiple container instance
failures, transferring the appropriate number of tokens to
𝑃𝑑𝑛𝐶𝑁𝑇 . In the event of a Docker failure, the transition 𝑇𝑓𝐷𝐶𝐾
is triggered and the (unique) token in 𝑃𝑢𝑝𝐷𝐶𝐾 is transferred
to𝑃𝑑𝑛𝐷𝐶𝐾 . Obviously, in this case all the containers on top
will fail. In the SRN model, this situation is translated into
“deactivating” the inhibitory arc which connects 𝑃𝑢𝑝𝐷𝐶𝐾 and
𝑡𝐶𝑁𝑇, thus𝑡𝐶𝑁𝑇 causes the immediate transferring of all 𝑛
tokens from 𝑃𝑢𝑝𝐶𝑁𝑇 to𝑃𝑑𝑛𝐶𝑁𝑇 . Moreover, we also note an
inhibitory arc from 𝑃𝑑𝑛𝐷𝐶𝐾 to𝑇𝑟𝐶𝑁𝑇 . This prevents tokens
in𝑃𝑑𝑛𝐶𝑁𝑇 from returning to 𝑃𝑢𝑝𝐶𝑁𝑇 in case Docker is
down (i.e., when the token is in 𝑃𝑑𝑛𝐷𝐶𝐾 ). Similar reasoning
holds true in case of virtual machine, hypervisor, or hardware
fault where a cascade effect can be observed. Notably, the
only layer with no immediate transition is the hardware layer
since no further dependencies from other lower layers must
be considered. The steady-state availability is obtained by:
𝐴=∑︁
𝑚∈M𝑟𝑚𝜋𝑚, (11)
whereMis the set of all possible markings (namely, the set of
all possible tokens distributions) that can be split in a subset of
“up” states (having reward 𝑟𝑚=1) and “down” states (having
reward𝑟𝑚=0), and where 𝜋𝑚denotes the probability of the
model to be in state 𝑚.
We note that the number of works exploiting such formalism
(eventually combined with others as discussed in Sect. VI-K
further ahead) is significantly larger than the number of
works exploiting SANs. This is probably due to the greater
availability of tools for SRNs with respect to those available
for SANs.
SRNs are the main formalism employed in [136]–[138],
where stochastic models of SDN-based infrastructures are in-
troduced to analyze the pertinent availability. Authors in [139]
employ the SRNs to perform an availability analysis of an
IaaS cloud architecture. Adopting this approach, they compare
two cases, a monolithic SRN case where an IaaS cloud
infrastructure is represented by using one and big SRN, and
--- Seite 22 ---
22
small sub-cases made of reduced SRN sub-models represent-
ing three pools of VMs: hot (running), warm (turned on,
but not ready) and cold (turned off). The advantage of SRN
sub-modeling is demonstrated also in [140] to analyze the
IaaS cloud availability. A stochastic modeling of an IaaS
infrastructure is proposed also in [141] and in [142], where
some SRN sub-models are combined to capture the monolithic
IaaS structure. SRNs are also adopted in [143] to characterize
some computer grid resources aimed at evaluating both per-
formance and availability. Operations such as VM placement
and migration are characterized through SRNs in [144], where
different scheduling methods are described as reward functions
to perform an adaptive evaluation. An availability modeling of
a hypervisor with three types of rejuvenation techniques (cold-
VM, warm-VM, Migrate-VM) is presented in [145].
SRNs have also been employed to model active and backup
servers in virtualized environments in [146], and to represent
cloud data centers with disaster tolerance in [147]. An “experi-
ence availability” analysis is proposed to evaluate online cloud
service in terms of both availability and response time in [148],
where the SRN formalism is extensively used. Furthermore,
SRNs are used to model: systems with software rejuvenation
enabled by the VM migration schedule [149], availability and
security aspects involved into VM migration processes [150],
software defined storage systems [151], virtualized systems
including hypervisor’s rejuvenation policies [152], reliabil-
ity of drones in a fog/edge environment [153], QoS-related
performance of cloud data centers [154], performance and
availability aspects related to the IMS infrastructure [155],
[156].
Interestingly, SRNs have also been exploited to automate
the construction of failure/repair models in virtualized in-
frastructures. In [157], authors present a component-based
availability modeling framework (named Candy) to build an
availability model from system specifications described by the
so-called Systems Modeling Language (SysML) which is then
connected to the corresponding SRN model. A semi-automated
framework (HASFC) to deal with the availability management
of NFV-MANO is described in [158]. The HASFC framework,
through the SRN availability modeling, is able to build a
highly available service function chain that the MANO can
deploy. Tools aimed at facilitating the deployment of reliable
service function chains have also been presented in [159]
and in [160], where SRN is exploited to design the avail-
ability models whereas the Model-driven Engineering (MDE)
paradigm aims to produce interpretable models by means of
specific semantic rules.
Some remarkable pros and cons associated to SRNs may be
highlighted:
Pros
•Differently from GSPNs and SANs, SRNs provide built-
in mechanisms to evaluate regime and transient rewards,
useful for system performance and cost analysis.
•SRNs (similar to SANs) allow to model both Marko-
vian (exponential) and non-Markovian (general) behav-
iors through reward structures.
•Many tools support SRNs for stochastic modeling and
reward-based performance analysis.Cons
•Similarly to GSPNs and SANs, SRNs offer less control
over individual states compared to CTMCs. This can
result in some states being less accessible.
•Constructing and analyzing SRNs requires specialized
knowledge in stochastic processes, reward structures, and
the use of related software tools, which may necessitate
training and experience.
•Some advanced SRN features (e.g., impulse rewards)
depend on specific tool support, which may not be
universally available.
J. Non-Markovian Processes (NMPs)
In contrast to Markov processes, which satisfy the Markov
property of absence of memory, non-Markovian processes
exhibit memory effects, meaning that the probability of tran-
sitioning to a future state depends on the entire history of the
system evolution up to the present moment. Accordingly, time
dependencies in non-Markovian processes can be complex and
may not follow simple exponential decay as in Markovian
processes. Instead, event durations and inter-event times may
follow arbitrary probability distributions. In order to exploit the
flexibility of non-Markovian models, also compact formalisms
(and related tools) such as SPNs, SANs, SRNs, can be con-
veniently modified to embed non-Markovian features [161],
[162]. In this section we briefly describe 3types of NMPs
(along with pertinent related works): Semi-Markov processes,
Markov Regenerative Processes, and Phase-Type Expansions.
1) Semi-Markov Processes (SMPs): A semi-Markov pro-
cess is a stochastic process that generalizes the Markov
process by allowing the holding (sojourn) time in each state to
follow any probability distribution, not necessarily exponential
[81]. In reliability and availability engineering, semi-Markov
processes are used to model systems where the assumption
of exponentially distributed times (as in traditional Markov
processes) does not hold. This is common in practical appli-
cations where the time to failure, repair times, or maintenance
durations follow more complex distributions. In the field of re-
liability/availability of virtualized infrastructures, recent works
have employed SMPs to: model availability and reliability
of service chains [163]–[167], characterize the availability of
virtualized nodes in presence of rejuvenation [168], describe
the resilience of unmanned aerial vehicles in a multi-access
edge computing environment [169], assess the availability of
cloud-based environments [170]–[174].
Figure 18 shows the technological representation (top part)
and the corresponding SMP model (bottom part) of a virtual-
ized system that incorporates live VM migration techniques
for rejuvenation, aimed at more accurately estimating job
completion time [168]. The system consists of two hosts, a
primary host with robust computational capabilities hosting
an active VM, and a backup host with limited computational
capacity to support live VM migration. If hypervisor aging is
detected during job execution on the primary host, the backup
host is selected to take over the job. The SMP model encodes
the system state as a 2-tuple index(𝑖,𝑗), where𝑖and𝑗repre-
sent the states of the primary and backup hosts, respectively.
--- Seite 23 ---
23
HYPERVISORVMHARDWAREHYPERVISORVMHARDWAREPrimaryHostBackupHostJOBHypervisorreadyHypervisoragingLive VM migration
(1,0)(4,0)(2,0)(3,0)(0,1)(0,2)
Fig. 18: Virtualized system with live VM migration [168]:
technological (top) and SMP model (bottom).
The following states are defined: (0)indicates that the job
is not running;(1)signifies that the job is running on a
host whose robustness is ensured through hypervisor reboot
or fix;(2)represents a host failure caused by a hypervisor
crash;(3)indicates that the job can be migrated via live VM
migration; and(4)denotes degraded host performance due to
hypervisor aging. In the SMP model depicted in Fig. 18, all
state transitions follow non-exponential (general) distributions.
Specifically, most transitions are modeled as hypo-exponential ,
reflecting the increasing failure rate typically associated with
software aging over time.
2) Markov Regenerative Processes (MRGPs): A Markov
regenerative process can be considered as a generalization of
many stochastic processes, including SMPs [175], [176]. In
reliability and availability engineering, MRGPs are particularly
useful for modeling systems where certain events cause the
system to “reset” its probabilistic behavior, while between
these events, the system behavior can be more complex. This
is common in systems with periodic maintenance, inspections,
or other interventions that effectively restart the probabilistic
model. More formally, in an MRGP, the Markov property
holds only when the process enters a subset of specific states
called regeneration states [6]. Attempts in using MRGPs in
the realm of virtualized networks include [177], where a
Markov regenerative process is exploited to build an analytical
model of an application service in a virtualized system, [178],
where an MRGP model to capture the states granularity of an
application server is considered, and [179], where the authors
propose a performability model for RAID storage systems
using MRGP to compare different RAID architectures.
3) Phase-Type Expansion (PTE): The Phase-Type Expan-
sion is a mathematical technique used in reliability and
availability engineering to model complex systems with non-
Markovian behavior by decomposing them into a series ofsimpler, Markovian sub-models known as phase-type distri-
butions. This technique is particularly valuable for analyzing
systems with diverse lifetimes or repair durations. Some works
exploiting this concept in the field of virtualized networks
include [180], where the authors apply a phase-type expansion
to assess the availability of VMs subject to two rejuvena-
tion policies (cold-VM and warm-VM), [181], where the
hypervisor time to failure is characterized through phase-type
distributions, [182], where PTE is used in the availability
modeling of fault tolerant cloud systems.
Some pros and cons associated to non-Markovian ap-
proaches follow:
Pros
•NMPs can model failure/repair events with any probabil-
ity distribution (e.g., Weibull, log-normal, gamma), which
is more realistic for many real-world systems, where the
exponential distribution assumption of Markovian models
does not hold.
•NMPs are versatile and can be applied to systems with
complex temporal behaviors that cannot be captured by
memoryless properties of Markovian models.
•NMP can use phase-type distributions to approximate
any arbitrary distribution, enabling detailed and flexible
modeling of time-to-event data.
Cons
•Constructing non-Markovian models is more complex
than building Markovian models. It requires detailed
knowledge of the underlying processes and appropriate
distribution fitting.
•Simulations and analytical solutions can take much longer
to execute compared to Markovian models, potentially
limiting their practical applicability in time-sensitive sce-
narios.
•There are fewer specialized software tools available for
non-Markovian models compared to Markovian models,
which can limit the ease of implementation and analysis.
K. Multi-level models
All the formalisms seen in the previous subsections have
their own peculiarities and allow for modeling specific reli-
ability/availability aspects of a system. However, given the
complexity of real-world systems, it is difficult for a single
formalism to appropriately capture the whole system behav-
ior. Thus, it is possible to combine different formalisms to
capture various aspects of a system, resulting in the so-
called multi-level models [6], [183]. In [58], three different
formalisms are adopted to characterize the availability of a
virtualized IP Multimedia Subsystem (vIMS) infrastructure as
shown in Fig. 19. The vIMS system forms an SFC with 4
nodes (P-CSCF, S-CSCF, I-CSCF, HSS) connected in series
as represented in the topmost part of Fig. 19. This “macro-
structure” can be modeled using RBDs, i.e., the first level of
availability modeling. The second level of modeling employs
a fault tree structure to capture the interdependencies among
hardware and software components within each node. For a
fault tree description of the sub-model in Fig. 19, refer to
Sect. VI-B. The third (and last) level of modeling uses a
--- Seite 24 ---
24
System Failure
HWSWCPUStorageAppOSHYPOR
First Level (high-layer) àRBDSecond Level (mid-layer) àFT
Third Level (low-layer) àCTMCλ!"!#(1−k!"!#)'µ$!"!#δ!"!#µ%!"!#k!"!#'µ$!"!#
Fig. 19: Multi-level formalism to evaluate the availability of
a virtualized IP Multimedia Subsystem (vIMS)
infrastructure [58], where multiple formalisms are combined
together: RBD to model high-level interconnections among
nodes (first level), FT to model sub-components
dependencies (second level), CTMC to model failure/repair
behavior of sub-components.
CTMC to characterize each single sub-system of hardware
and software modules. In particular, a 4-state CTMC models
the software application (App) sub-system on top of the I-
CSCF node. Starting from a perfectly functioning condition,
the App enters state 𝐷1with rate𝜆𝐶𝑆𝐶𝐹 as a consequence
of a failure not yet detected. Once the failure is detected,
the sub-system enters state 𝐷2with a detection rate 𝛿𝐶𝑆𝐶𝐹 .
At this point, a recovery procedure starts with repair rate
𝜇1𝐶𝑆𝐶𝐹 , and two events can occur: 𝑖)the recovery procedure
is successful and the sub-system comes back to the 𝑈𝑃state
with probability(1−𝑘𝐶𝑆𝐶𝐹);𝑖𝑖)the recovery procedure is
unsuccessful and the sub-system enters the 𝑅𝑃state with
probability𝑘𝐶𝑆𝐶𝐹 before reaching the 𝑈𝑃 state with rate
𝜇2𝐶𝑆𝐶𝐹 . In this work, the multi-level formalism is managed
via SHARPE (see Sect. VII) which provides an efficient way
to solve a model which incorporates more than one formalism.
Some existing works (see below) adopt this flexible approach
to deal with reliability/availability issues of complex systems
by combining the advantages offered by different techniques.
Authors in [68] adopt a two-level approach to model a
virtualized system where fault trees are employed in the upper
level to capture the nodes dependencies, and CTMC is adopted
in the lower level to characterize the availability of sub-
systems (e.g., CPU, memory, etc.). The FT/CTMC couplingis also used in [184] to evaluate the availability of virtual
machines within a Cloud infrastructure, e.g., in [185] to build
an availability model of a virtual triple modular redundant
system with applications in cloud computing, and in [186] to
characterize an edge network from a resiliency point of view.
An RBD/SPN combination is used in [187] [188] and in [189]
for a dependability evaluation of data center infrastructures,
and in [190], [191] to assess performance and availability
of storage services in a private cloud. A detailed availability
analysis of virtualized network environments supported by
the combination of RBD and SPN formalisms is presented
in [192]. In particular, both nodes and links in a virtual-
ized network environment are modeled through SPNs, for
two possible scenarios: a “no-redundancy mapping scenario”,
where virtual nodes are mapped onto physical nodes and
virtual links are mapped onto physical paths, and a “hot-
standby mapping scenario”, where each virtual node is mapped
onto two physical nodes (primary+spare) and each virtual
link is mapped onto four physical paths, corresponding to
the Cartesian product of the physical nodes (primary-primary,
primary-spare, spare-primary, spare-spare).
The RBD/SRN couple is adopted in: [193] for availability
assessment of virtualized data centers, in [194], [195] to evalu-
ate steady-state availability of an IMS infrastructure deployed
in a containerized environment, in [196] for availability eval-
uation of an SFC managed by the Virtualized Infrastructure
Manager (VIM). RBD/SRN is also adopted in [197] to
characterize the availability of 5G virtualized architectures
where AMF, SMF, and UPF nodes need to be conveniently
replicated to ensure both a given performance (in terms of
end-to-end delay constraint) and a given availability target
(identifed as the five-nines). FTs and SRNs are employed
in [198] for a container availability analysis. RBDs and CTMC
are used in a combined manner to characterize, from an
availability point of view, multimedia services in a cloud
environment as shown in [199]–[202]. A three-layered model
is used for reliability and availability evaluation of cloud
data center networks in [203], where: reliability graphs (an
“intermediate” formalism between RBD and FT) are used to
model the system network topology at the top layer, FTs
are used to model the architecture of the subsystems at the
middle layer, and SRNs are used to capture the behaviors
and dependency of the components in sub-systems at the
bottom layer. A similar hierarchical structure is considered
in [204] to model availability in SDNs, where failure modes
and recovery behaviors include link failures at network level,
and software and hardware failures at network device level. A
combination of RBD and MRM is adopted in [205] to model
a mobile cloud environment also considering four distinct
redundancy mechanisms, and in [206] to analyze the warm-
standby replication mechanism in a virtualization environment.
Some pros and cons associated to multi-level models in-
clude:
Pros
•Multi-level modeling enables the reuse of existing sub-
models, allowing different components or subsystems to
be analyzed independently and then integrated into a
larger system model, improving scalability.
--- Seite 25 ---
25
•Different formalisms have different strengths and weak-
nesses. Combining them allows to leverage the strengths
of each formalism to effectively model different aspects
of a system’s behavior .
•Multi-level formalisms enable to represent system behav-
ior at different levels of detail, from high-level system
architecture to detailed component interactions, allowing
for a more granular analysis.
Cons
•Combining multiple formalisms can result in complex
models that are challenging to develop, understand, and
maintain. Managing the complexity of such models re-
quires significant expertise and computational resources.
•Integrating different formalisms and tools can be non-
trivial, as they may use different modeling languages,
assumptions, and data formats. Ensuring seamless inte-
gration and data consistency across different formalisms
can be a significant challenge.
•Combining different formalisms increases the risk of
inconsistencies or inaccuracies between different parts of
the model. Ensuring consistency and coherence across
different levels of the model requires special attention to
detail and thorough validation processes.
We conclude this section by providing a concise mapping
between the analyzed references and the adopted formalisms
summarized in: Table IV (works adopting non-state space
formalisms), Table V (works adopting Markovian state-space
formalisms), Table VI (works adopting Markovian (Petri-
based) state-space formalisms), Table VII (works adopting
non-Markovian state-space formalisms), Table VIII (works
adopting multi-level formalisms).
--- Seite 26 ---
26
TABLE IV: Works using non-state space formalisms.
Formalism Paper Brief Description
RBDAhmed et al. [48] Reliability assessment of a virtual data center (VDC) in a cloud computing architecture
Santos et al. [49] Availability/Energy-aware SFC placement, where the chain is modeled via RBD
Jansen et al. [50] Reliability analysis of virtualized and physical nodes via RBD series/parallel rules
Wang et al. [51] Availability model of VNFs composing a Service Function Chain
Chantre et al. [52] Series/parallel redundant models in 5G NFV-based networks
Ding et al. [53] Reliability services in NFV with series/parallel VNF modeling
Li et al. [54] Availability-aware provision of SFC in a MEC environment with redundant VNF modeling
Fan et al. [55] VNF series/parallel modeling for availability analysis of service chains
Wang et al. [56] Availability characterization of physical and virtual resources in SFCs via series/parallel models
Souza et al. [57] Availability evaluation of NFV datacenters whose components are modeled via RBD
FTLi et al. [59] Reliability model for cloud computing with FTs modeling various fault states of VMs
Butoi et al. [60] FTA applied in virtualized environments with a distributed and multi-agent approach
Dai et al. [61] FT modeling of IEC 61499 function blocks executed on both physical controllers and cloud services
Zhu et al. [62] FT modeling of 5G core network faults
Paulraj et al. [63] Design of a fault-tolerant cloud data center, where FTA is used to study the VMs failure process
Butoi et al. [64] VMs failures characterization in an IaaS-based environment via FTA
Paulraj et al. [65] Analysis of fault-tolerant cloud systems via FT modeling
Mani et al. [66] FT usage to identify repairs and failures of VMs and to reduce energy consumption in cloud computing
TABLE V: Works using stochastic Markovian state-space formalisms.
Formalism Paper Brief Description
CTMCFarooq et al. [69] Availability/Reliability modeling of 5G base stations with different states (e.g., working, failed)
Escheikh et al. [70] CTMC modeling of load balancers to distribute network traffic among SDN controllers
Thein et al. [71] Markov model of virtualized two-node cluster with various states (active, standby, rejuvenated, etc.)
Thein et al. [72] Markov model of Active/Standby VMs with four states (healthy, unstable, rejuvenation, failure)
Thein et al. [73] VM-based software rejuvenation for high availability of application server systems
Song et al. [74] CTMC model to predict the rate of requests forwarded to cloud providers by a federation of hybrid clouds
Liu et al. [75] Three-state (failure, migration, recovery) CTMC model of a VM in an edge server
Changa et al. [76] Survivability model of a virtualized system after service breakdown through CTMC
Hong et al. [77] Availability assessment of multiple cluster nodes with common mode failures via Markov models
Wakuda et al. [78] Markov model for unavailability analysis of middlebox functions with multiple backup servers
Nozomi et al. [79] VM backup allocation model to minimize unavailability using Markov models to analyze transition states
MRMKirsal et al. [82] Performance (QoS) and availability (failure/repair) of cloud systems via MRM modeling
de S. Matos et al. [83] Steady-state availability analysis of a virtualized server via MRM
Sun et al. [84] MRM used to analyze the correlation between reliability and performance in a cloud service
Hossfeld et al. [85] Online cloud gaming characterization via MRM models
Hossfeld et al. [86] User-centric MRM models to characterize Google Stadia cloud gaming
Sana et al. [87] Performance/dependability MRM-based model to design a reliable cloud radio access network
MSSDe Simone et al. [96] Performability assessment of multi-provider IMS architecture via MSS modeling of containers
Mo et al. [90] Availability assessment of cloud computing systems via multi-valued decision diagrams to represent MSSs
Mo et al. [91] Multi-valued decision diagram approach for performability of cloud nodes with different state probabilities
Di Mauro et al. [94] MUGF approach to deal with SFC availability, benefiting from MSS representation of virtual nodes
De Simone et al. [95] Performability evaluation of a container-based IMS infrastructure via MSS modeling
De Simone et al. [97] MSS formalization of containerized network functions belonging to multi-tenant SFCs
Di Mauro et al. [98] MSS modeling of an SDN controller supervising different virtual provider instances
Di Mauro et al. [99] Reliability assessment of an SDN controller through MSS modeling
Arakawa et al. [100] MSS formalization of VNFs belonging to SFCs aimed at availability evaluation
--- Seite 27 ---
27
TABLE VI: Works using stochastic Markovian ( Petri-based ) state-space formalisms.
Formalism Paper Brief Description
SPNSantos et al. [101] SPN to model redundancy strategies for SFC availability
Schoenen et al. [102] SPN modeling of network virtualization resource pooling
Zabala et al. [103] SPN modeling of virtualized firewall aimed at performance analysis
Carvalho et al. [104] SPN to represent a MEC scenario and analyze its performance
Silva et al. [105] Mobile cloud computing performance prediction via SPN
Jammal et al. [106] Availability model of cloud services via SPN formalism
Mendonça et al. [107] SPN and fault injection to evaluate availability of cloud-based disaster recovery solutions
Ghosh et al. [108] OpenStack Swift and CephFS reliability modeling through SPN
Silva et al. [109] Performability evaluation of disaster-tolerant IaaS infrastructures via SPN modeling
Brilhante et al. [110] Dependability assessment of the cloud-based platform Eucalyptus
Brito et al. [111] Availability assessment of a MEC system via SPN characterization
Rui et al. [112] Reliability assessment of SFCs with VNF migration strategy
Jammal et al. [113] High-availability evaluation of critical cloud services with scoring systems + Colored SPN
Rizwan Ali et al. [114] Availability analysis of resource utilization in cloud computing via Colored SPN modeling
Dong et al. [115] Availability evaluation of SFCs under different elasticity strategies
Li et al. [116] Resilience evaluation of virtualized 5G and beyond networks
GSPNZhu et al. [118] Availability evaluation of VNFs in active-standby configurations through GSPN
Rodrigues et al. [119] Performability evaluation of private cloud computing via GSPN modeling of NoSQL DBMS
Almutairi et al. [120] GSPN model for Denial of Service attacks in SDN
Liu et al. [121] Colored GSPN for cloud data center reliability evaluation
SANVizarreta et al. [124] Failure dynamics of SDN controller via SAN modeling
Tola et al. [125] SAN availability models for network services and VNFs
Tola et al. [126] SAN availability model for NFV-MANO component with software rejuvenation
Tola et al. [127] Availability and sensitivity analyses of NFV services via SAN modeling
Entezari-Maleki et al. [128] SAN modeling aimed at evaluating VMs performance via scale up/down operations
Gonzalez et al. [129] Availability assessment of virtual Evolved Packet Core using SAN
Roohitavaf al. [130] Availability modeling and evaluation of cloud virtual data centers
Pathirana al. [131] SAN availability modeling of crucial components in 5G-MEC systems
Ataie et al. [132] Availability evaluation of dispatching policies in cloud environments via SAN modeling
Tola et al. [133] Availability modes characterization in NFV-enabled network services
SRNDi Mauro et al. [123] SRN modeling of containerized IMS aimed at availability evaluation
Longo et al. [139] SRN availability modeling for IaaS cloud infrastructures
Ghosh et al. [140] SRN sub-modeling for IaaS cloud availability analysis
Ataie et al. [141] Two SRN models to evaluate performance, availability, and power consumption of IaaS cloud
Liu et al. [142] Monolithic and interacting SRN sub-models for IaaS availability analysis
Entezari-Maleki et al. [143] Performability evaluation via SRN modeling of grid resource computing
Liu et al. [144] Availability study of VMs with placement and migration modeled using SRN
Machida et al. [145] SRN Availability model of virtualized servers aimed at analyze VMM rejuvenation
Shojaee et al. [146] Availability analysis of cloud virtualization via SRN
Nguyen et al. [147] SRN availability modeling of cloud data centers with disaster recovery
Cao et al. [148] Experience-availability model of online cloud services via SRN
Torquato et al. [149] Interacting SRN models for availability evaluation of VM migration
Torquato et al. [150] SRN availability and security modeling of VM migration
Di Mauro et al. [151] SRN availability modeling of OpenStack Swift (Software-defined storage)
Nguyen et al. [152] Failure/Recovery analysis via SRN models of virtualized servers
Zhang et al. [153] Performability analysis of drone computing via SRN characterization
Di Mauro et al. [155] Performability evaluation of SFCs via automated REST-based framework
Di Mauro et al. [156] SRN modeling of different containerized deployments of IMS
Paing [136] SRN modeling of a cluster of SDN controllers
Han et al. [137] SRN availability/reliability model for power consumption in SDN-based infrastructures
Nguyen et al. [138] SRN modeling for SDN architectures
Machida et al. [157] Activity diagrams/SRNs mapping for cloud service management
Di Mauro et al. [158] Automated framework for SFC high-availability management via SRN
Di Mauro et al. [159] Automated generation of availability models for SFCs assisted by SRN
Di Mauro et al. [160] EMF tool for automated generation of SFCs via SRN
--- Seite 28 ---
28
TABLE VII: Works using stochastic non-Markovian state-space formalisms.
Formalism Paper Brief Description
SMPLi et al. [163] Semi-Markov model to characterize VNF and SFC suffering from software aging
Liu et al. [164] Semi-Markov models to capture behaviors of VMs and VMMs with software aging
Bai et al. [165] Transient and steady-state availability of MEC-SFC services via SMP
Bai et al. [166] SMP to evaluate the impact of rejuvenation strategies on the SFC service reliability/availability
Bai et al. [167] SMP to analyze the effectiveness of proactive rejuvenation techniques in micro service chains
Bai et al. [168] SMP to model application services availability in virtualized systems
Bai et al. [169] SMP to characterize resilience of Unmanned Aerial Vehicle-based MEC services
Ivanchenko et al. [170] Availability of IaaS services via SMP modeling
Ivanchenko et al. [171] Markov/Semi-Markov models aimed at availability assessment of cloud server systems
Mengistu et al. [172] SMP models for availability/reliability prediction for volunteer cloud systems
Ivanchenko et al. [173] SMP approach to characterize sudden failures of physical machines in IaaS
Kharchenko et al. [174] SMP approach for availability modeling of cloud and IoT systems
MRGPBai et al. [177] Availability modeling of application services, VM, and VMMs, via MRGP
Ning et al. [178] MRGP-based performance analysis of computing systems suffering from software aging
Machida et al. [179] Performability of RAID storage systems via MRGP modeling
PTEOkamura et al. [180] PTE to analyze the pointwise availability of virtual-machines with software rejuvenation policies
Bruneo et al. [181] PTE-based evaluation for the optimal rejuvenation policy maximizing VMM availability
Mani et al. [182] Availability analysis of fault tolerant cloud systems via PTE
TABLE VIII: Works using multi-level formalisms.
Formalism Paper Brief Description
FT/CTMCKim et al. [68] Hierarchical availability modeling (FT high level, CTMC low level)
Jhawar et al. [184] Fault tolerance mechanisms in IaaS cloud environments
Paharsingh et al. [185] Availability modeling of Triple Modular Redundant System (TMR) via FT/CTMC
Nguyen et al. [186] Resiliency evaluation of medical edge networks via FT/CTMC modeling
RBD/SPNSilva et al. [187] Tool to evaluate dependability of data centers combining RBD and SPN
Callou et al. [188] Combination of RBD and SPN to assess sustainability and dependability of data centers
Sousa et al. [189] Hierarchical RBD/SPN approach to evaluate dependability of the Eucalyptus platform
Bezerra et al. [190] Performability of storage services in private clouds via RBD/SPN
Bezerra et al. [191] Hierarchical strategy to evaluate availability and performance of cloud storage services
Lira et al. [192] RBD/SPN availability modeling of virtualized architectures
RBD/SRNTorquato et al. [193] Virtualized datacenter availability model via RBD/SRN
Di Mauro et al. [194] Availability analysis of containerized IMS in a cloud environment via hierarchical modeling
Di Mauro et al. [195] Performability evaluation of network service chains with delay constraints
Di Mauro et al. [196] SFC availability modeling and evaluation combining RBD and SRN
De Simone et al. [197] Performability assessment of 5G network nodes of Open5GS architecture via combined formalisms
FT/SRN Sebastio et al. [198] Availability evaluation of container management systems via FT/SRN
RBD/MRMAraujo et al. [205] Mobile cloud computing modeling with distinct redundancy mechanisms
Dantas et al. [206] Analysis of warm-standby replication procedure into virtualized networks
RBD/CTMCMelo et al. [199] Availability models for cloud environments designed for video streaming services
Melo et al. [200] Sensitivity analysis of Video on Demand streaming service in cloud
Melo et al. [201] Availability and sensitivity evaluation of Video on Demand hosted by Eucalyptus platform
Bezerra et al. [202] RBD/CTMC modeling of video services in cloud
3-levelDi Mauro et al. [58] Availability model of VNFs composing a Service Function Chain via RBD/FT/CTMC
Nguyen et al. [203] Reliability and availability evaluation of cloud data centers via Reliability graphs/FT/SRN modeling
Nguyen et al. [204] Reliability and availability evaluation of SDN via Reliability graphs/FT/SRN modeling
--- Seite 29 ---
29
VII. M ODELING TOOLS
In this section we propose an overview of the most use-
ful software tools to deal with reliability and availability
modeling. We have selected a subset of tools that: 𝑖)are
both commercial and open-source/free, 𝑖𝑖)are officially and
currently supported (or, at least, not discontinued), 𝑖𝑖𝑖)support
a variety of formalisms to model reliability and availability
aspects related to virtualized networks. Beyond a concise
description, we provide a summary of the main features for
each tool in Table IX further ahead. Moreover, for each tool,
we provide reference to its main web page.
A. SHARPE
SHARPE2(Symbolic Hierarchical Automated Reliability
and Performance Evaluator) [207] has been developed at
the Duke University (US) and is a versatile hierarchical
modeling tool designed for analyzing stochastic models re-
lated to reliability, availability, performance, and performa-
bility. It both supports analytical solutions and simulations.
This tool supports a variety of modeling techniques includ-
ing: Markov chains (irreducible, acyclic, phase-type), semi
Markov chains, reliability block diagrams, fault trees, relia-
bility graphs, single-chain product-form queueing networks,
multiple-chain product-form queueing networks, generalized
stochastic Petri nets. Many of these formalisms can be also
combined in a hierarchical way (e.g., high-level RBDs and
low-level Markov Chains). Steady-state, transient and interval
measures can be computed. SHARPE allows both GUI and
textual interaction, is compatible with most OS platforms
(Windows, Linux, Solaris), and, in general, with any JVM-
based platform. It is free for academic use upon agreement.
B. TimeNET
TimeNET3(Timed Net Evaluation Tool) [208] has been
developed at the Technische Universität of Berlin (Germany),
and later maintained at the Universities of Dortmund and
Leipzig. The tool has been optimized to deal with many
aspects related to SPNs. In particular, it provides support
for: Deterministic and stochastic Petri nets (DSPNs) which
allow exponentially distributed and deterministic firing delays,
general SPNs (referred to as extended DSPNs) which allow for
non-exponentially distributed firing delays, and DSPNs with
concurrently enabled deterministic transitions (referred to as
concurrent DSPNs). Depending on the SPN class, TimeNET
supports analytical and numerical solutions. Moreover it al-
lows for steady-state and transient analyses. TimeNET is
equipped with a convenient user interface, and it is compatible
with most OS platforms (Windows, Linux, Solaris) and with
any JVM-based platform. It is free for non-commercial use.
C. SPNP
SPNP4(Stochastic Petri Net Package) [209] has been de-
veloped at the Duke University (US) and has been customized
2https://sharpe.pratt.duke.edu/
3http://timenet.tu-ilmenau.de
4https://trivedi.pratt.duke.edu/software_packages/spnpto deal with transient and steady-state analysis of GSPNs. It
is mainly textual (very powerful for C-skilled users). SRNs
are specified through CSPL (C based SRN Language) being
an extension of the C language with additional constructs to
describe SRN models. Then, SRN specifications are converted
into an MRM that is solved to compute steady-state, transient,
and sensitivity measures. SPNP is compatible with most OS
platforms (Windows, Linux, Solaris), and is free for academic
use upon agreement.
D. Mercury
Mercury5[210] is a tool developed and maintained by the
MoDCS research group (Brazil) which supports a variety of
modeling techniques aimed at performance and dependability
analyses, including: FTs, RBDs, SPNs, CTMCs, DTMCs, En-
ergy Flow Models (EFMs). Mercury allows to evaluate models
characterized both by exponentially and non-exponentially
distributed firing delays. It has a dedicated SPN editor and
evaluator allowing for simulation and numerical analysis tech-
niques and transient/steady-state evaluation. Differently from
other tools, Mercury also embeds an Energy Flow Model
editor and evaluator useful to evaluate attributes such as costs,
sustainability, power consumption and sustainability of cloud-
related infrastructures. Mercury can be used through CLI or
GUI and is compatible with most OS platforms (Windows,
Linux). To download the tool, a preliminary registration to
the MoDCS web portal is needed.
E. WebSPN
WebSPN6[211] is a modeling tool developed at the Uni-
versity of Messina (Italy). It has been mainly conceived for
the analysis of non-Markovian SPNs, with the possibility of
analyzing a wide class of models with multiple preemptive
repeat different, preemptive resume, and preemptive repeat
identical concurrently enabled generally distributed transitions.
It is based on the client-server paradigm: the client side is
dedicated to manage the design of models, whereas the server
side is in charge to solve the models via some analyses engines
written in C/C++. It is possible to separately install the client
and server parts onto Linux-based platforms. The tool is free
for non-commercial uses.
F . GreatSPN
GreatSPN7[212] is a GUI-based tool developed at the
University of Torino (Italy). The tool is aimed at modeling,
validating, and evaluating performance of distributed sys-
tems through Generalized SPNs and their colored extension
(Stochastic well-formed Nets). GreatSPN has a modular struc-
ture and allows to run different analysis modules on different
machines in a distributed computing environment. The various
modules are written in C, and use special storage techniques
to save memory for intermediate result files and for program
data structures. GreatSPN is available for free for universities
and non-profit organizations upon a license agreement, and is
compatible with INTEL and PPC architectures.
5https://www.modcs.org/
6https://webspn.unime.it/
7https://www.di.unito.it/ ∼greatspn/index.html/
--- Seite 30 ---
30
G. Möbius
Möbius8[213] is a tool developed at the University of Illi-
nois Urbana-Champaign (US). The tool is aimed at modeling
the behavior of complex systems with particular focus on relia-
bility, availability, and performance of computer and network
systems. Supported models include stochastic extensions of
Petri nets, Markov chains and their extensions, and stochastic
process algebras. Depending on the model, the tool supports
both analytical solutions and simulations. Möbius is available
upon staff approval, and is compatible with Windows, Linux,
and MacOS platforms.
H. CPN IDE
CPN IDE9[214] formerly CPN Tools is a tool originally
developed at the Aarhus University (Denmark) and then trans-
ferred to Eindhoven University of Technology (The Nether-
lands). It has been conceived to deal with coloured and non-
coloured Petri nets. It is compatible with platforms supporting
JVM and offers a new JavaScript-based CPN editor which
communicates through a REST interface with a Java-based
controller. All the components are freely available.
I. QPME
QPME10[215] is a tool made of two components: QPE
(QPN Editor) and SimQPN (Simulator for QPNs). QPE pro-
vides a user-friendly graphical tool, whereas SimQPN provides
a discrete-event simulation engine. This tool combines the
modeling power of queueing networks and generalized SPNs.
QPME is compatible with most OS platforms (Windows,
Linux, Solaris), and is open-source.
J. APNN-Toolbox
APNN-Toolbox11[216] is born as an open toolset to define a
common exchange interface called Abstract Petri Net Notation
(APNN) developed at the Dortmund University (Germany).
It is equipped with a GUI to define and manage Petri nets.
Quantitative analysis focuses on continuous time Markov
chains (CTMCs) and their transient and steady-state behavior.
Kronecker representations are used to face the state space
explosion problem.
K. Snoopy
Snoopy12[217] is a tool written in C++ and developed
at the University of Technology in Cottbus (Germany). This
tool provides a Petri net framework where models can be
hierarchically organized, allowing to deal with large networks.
Snoopy is compatible with most OS platforms (Windows,
Linux, Mac), and is distributed free of charge for academic
use.
8https://www.mobius.illinois.edu/
9https://cpnide.org/
10https://se.informatik.uni-wuerzburg.de/software-engineering-
group/tools/qpme/download/
11https://ls4-www.cs.tu-dortmund.de/APNN-TOOLBOX/
12https://www-dssz.informatik.tu-cottbus.de/DSSZ/Software/SnoopyL. SURE
SURE13(Semi-markov Unreliability Range
Evaluator) [218] is born as a modeling tool developed
at NASA (National Aeronautics and Space Administration).
It is a reliability analysis tool useful to calculate upper
and lower bounds on state probabilities for a large class
of semi-Markov models. It has been customized to analyze
fault-tolerant reconfigurable systems. A Java version of this
tool (called WinSURE) works on Linux, Mac, and Windows
operating systems, and it is distributed under the NASA
public domain license.
M. PIPE2
PIPE214(Platform Independent Petri net Editor 2) [219]
is an open-source Java-based tool that supports the design
and analysis of GSPN models. It was born as a postgraduate
team programming project in the Department of Computing at
Imperial College (London). The tool relies onto Performance
Trees formalism, useful to provide graphical specification of
performance queries. A Performance Tree query is represented
as a tree structure that consists of nodes and connecting arcs.
Being Java-based, this tool can be installed on a variety of
software platforms.
N. ORIS Tool
ORIS15[220] has been developed at the University of
Firenze (Italy). The tool allows to perform transient and
steady-state analysis of Stochastic Time Petri Net and Markov
Regenerative Processes, and transient analysis associated to
semi-Markov processes, where the timed transitions can also
be modeled in terms of non-exponential distributions. The tool
supports different operating system (Windows/Linux/MacOS)
and provides some Java API useful to perform extensive
reliability/availability analyses considering the combination of
several parameters and model variants.
O. Reliasoft BlockSim®
Reliasoft BlockSim16is a commercial product which pro-
vides a uniform framework to manage an ample variety of
analyses for both repairable and non-repairable systems in-
cluding reliability analysis, maintainability analysis, availabil-
ity analysis, reliability optimization, throughput calculation,
process flow diagrams, resource allocation, life cycle cost
estimation and other system analyses. In particular it supports
FMEA (Failure Modes and Effects Analysis) and FMECA
(Failure Modes, Effects, and Criticality Analysis), which are
systematic methodologies used to identify potential failure
modes in a system, process, or product and assess their impact.
It supports Windows-based operating systems.
13https://shemesh.larc.nasa.gov/people/rwb/sure.html
14https://pipe2.sourceforge.net/
15https://www.oris-tool.org/
16https://help.reliasoft.com/blocksim21/content/current_application_intro.htm
--- Seite 31 ---
31
TABLE IX: Modeling tools and their main features. The first 14rows (in white) enumerate open-source/freeware tools, whereas
the last 4rows (in light gray) enumerate commercial tools.
Authors/Company Tool Features Supported Methods
Sahner & Trivedi
[207]SHARPE GUI, specification language,
Win/Linux/Solaris and any JVM-
based platform, free for academic
use upon agreementFTs, RBDs, Markov models, Semi-
Markov models, MRMs, SPNs, SRNs,
Multi-level models
German et al. [208] TimeNET GUI, Win/Linux/Solaris and any
JVM-based platform, free for
non-commercial useSPNs, SRNs, non-Markovian SPNs
Ciardo et al. [209] SPNP Textual, specification language
(CSPL), exploits the power of C
language, Win/Linux/Solaris plat-
forms, free for academic use upon
agreementGeneralized SPNs, SRNs
Maciel et al. [210] Mercury GUI, Win/Linux, free for non-
commercial usesFTs, RBDs, SPNs, CTMCs, DTMCs,
EFMs
Longo et al. [211] WebSPN GUI, Client/Server model, Linux,
free for non-commercial usesnon-Markovian SPNs
Marsan et al. [212] GreatSPN GUI, INTEL/PPC architectures,
free for academic usesGeneralized SPNs, Stochastic Well-
formed Nets
Courtney et al. [213] Möbius GUI, Win/Linux/MacOS, free for
non-commercial usesSPNs/SANs, Markov Chains, Stochas-
tic Process Algebras
Verbeek & Fahland
[214]CPN IDE GUI, JVM-based platforms via
REST interface, freeColoured & non-Coloured Petri Nets
Kouned et al. [215] QPME GUI, Win/Linux/Solaris, open
sourceGeneralized SPNs
Bause et al. [216] APNN-
ToolboxGUI, Win/Linux/Solaris and
JVM-based platforms, open
sourceAbstract Petri Net Notation
Rohr et al. [217] Snoopy GUI, Win/Linux/MacOS, free for
academic usesStochastic, Continuous and hybrid
Petri nets
Butler [218] SURE Textual/GUI, abstract language,
Win/Linux/SPARC platforms,
NASA public domain licenseSemi-Markov models
Dingle et al. [219] PIPE2 GUI, JVM-based platforms, MIT
licenseGeneralized SPNs
Paolieri et al. [220] ORIS Tool GUI, Win/Linux/MacOS, open
sourceSPNs, non-Markovian SPNs
Reliasoft BlockSim® GUI, Windows platforms, .NET
Framework, Commercial licenseFMEA/FMECA, FTs, RBDs, Markov
Chains, Maintainability analysis
Isograph Reliability
Workbench®GUI, Windows platforms, Com-
mercial licenseFMEA/FMECA, FTs, RBDs, Markov
Chains, System Safety assessments
BQR BQR Care® GUI, Windows platforms, Com-
mercial licenseFMEA/FMECA, FTs, RBDs, System
Safety assessments
ITEM ITEM
ToolKit®GUI, Windows platforms, Com-
mercial licenseFMEA/FMECA, FTs, RBDs, Main-
tainability analysis
P . Isograph Reliability Workbench®
Isograph Reliability Workbench17is a comprehensive suite
of tools designed for reliability, availability, maintainability,
and safety (RAMS) analysis. It supports various formalisms
and analysis, including: Reliability block diagram analysis,
FTA, common cause and importance analysis, Event Tree
Analysis (ETA) with multiple risk categories, Markov anal-
ysis including multi-phase modelling, FMEA and FMECA. It
supports Windows-based operating systems.
17https://www.isograph.com/software/reliability-workbench/Q. BQR Care®
BQR Care18software provides a comprehensive suite for
system reliability management, focusing on several key areas:
Fault Tree Analysis, Life Cycle Cost Analysis, Reliability
Block Diagrams analysis, Maintenance Optimization, FMEA
and FMECA. It supports Windows-based operating systems.
18https://www.bqr.com/products/care
--- Seite 32 ---
32
R. ITEM ToolKit®
ITEM ToolKit19offers comprehensive tools for reliability
analysis, supporting various methodologies and standards,
using a proprietary graphical user interface. This tool sup-
ports the following functionalities and activities: Reliability
Prediction, Reliability Block Diagrams Analysis, Fault Tree
Analysis, Event Tree Analysis, Markov analysis, Maintainabil-
ity and Spares Analysis. It supports Windows-based operating
systems.
VIII. C ONCLUSION AND OPEN CHALLENGES
This survey provides an in-depth examination of vari-
ous aspects—including standards, techniques, and software
tools—related to the availability and reliability modeling and
analysis of virtualized network infrastructures. The primary
goal is to offer a convenient reference for researchers, prac-
titioners, and network designers involved in the modeling
and deployment processes of reliable and highly available
virtualized networks.
First, we highlight critical aspects of the standardization pro-
cess handled by the European Telecommunications Standards
Institute (ETSI), which has released a series of guidelines
on reliability and availability issues related to virtualized
networks. Next, we propose a taxonomy of formalisms adopted
to model various reliability and availability aspects, along
with a mapping of references related to the usage of these
formalisms in virtualized infrastructures. When possible, we
have avoided mathematical details, focusing instead on the
crucial information necessary to understand how to employ
these formalisms to model reliable virtualized networks.
Moreover, we present and discuss a comprehensive in-
ventory of the most well-known software tools useful for
managing these formalisms. For each tool, we have extracted
the main features (supported operating systems, implemented
formalisms, etc.).
Finally, we pinpoint a set of relevant open issues and
research challenges which deserve a deeper investigation.
A. Scalability Issues
A major challenge in large-scale virtualized networks is
accurately modeling the interplay between availability, relia-
bility, and performance. Traditional modeling techniques often
treat these aspects separately, which can lead to oversimplified
assumptions and suboptimal designs, particularly as networks
scale. In complex environments—such as large-scale cloud
data centers or 5G network cores—failures, resource con-
tention, and dynamic workload shifts create intricate depen-
dencies that existing models struggle to capture.
To address these limitations, future research should fo-
cus on developing scalability-aware modeling techniques that
explicitly incorporate the interdependencies between avail-
ability, reliability, and performance in large-scale virtualized
infrastructures. This includes exploring hybrid analytical and
simulation-based approaches capable of scaling with network
complexity while maintaining predictive accuracy. Ensuring
19https://www.itemtoolkit.com/that these models align with industry standards, such as those
defined by ETSI, will be crucial for their practical adoption.
B. Fault Tolerance and Resilience
As virtualized networks grow in complexity, ensuring fault
tolerance becomes increasingly challenging due to the dy-
namic and distributed nature of these environments. Tra-
ditional resilience strategies, often designed for static and
hardware-based infrastructures, may struggle to adapt to the
failure modes of virtualized network elements, where faults
can propagate unpredictably across software-defined compo-
nents.
Existing formal methods often assume static configurations,
making them less effective in modeling transient failures and
cascading effects in cloud-native and edge computing envi-
ronments. Future research should focus on designing adaptive
fault-tolerance frameworks that leverage anomaly detection,
self-healing mechanisms, and cross-layer resilience strategies.
C. Security and Trust
Security issues in virtualized networks are amplified due to
the complexity of such systems. One significant challenge is
addressing the reliability issues that can emerge throughout
the VNF software lifecycle, from implementation and coding
to verification and testing. Additionally, the redundancy that
enhances reliability and availability also increases the attack
surface, introducing new security vulnerabilities. Balancing the
need for redundant systems with the imperative to secure these
systems against potential threats is a critical area of future
research.
D. Energy Efficiency
As the demand for more reliable and available virtualized
networks grows, also the energy consumption required to
maintain them grows. Future challenges in this area include
modeling the trade-offs between energy efficiency and reli-
ability/availability through specific techniques. Indeed, while
redundancy and robust fault tolerance are essential for main-
taining high availability, they can also lead to increased energy
usage. Research should also focus on integrating these mod-
els into energy-efficient technologies and exploring dynamic
management strategies that adjust energy consumption based
on real-time network conditions, all while adhering to ETSI
guidelines.
E. Automation and Orchestration
The complexity of managing virtualized networks necessi-
tates advanced orchestration tools that can automate deploy-
ment, management, and fault isolation processes. However,
as these orchestration processes become more sophisticated
and less controlled by human operators, ensuring that they do
not compromise reliability and availability during operations
is a significant challenge. Future research should focus on
enhancing orchestration tools with service and network verifi-
cation features leveraging real-time reliability and availability
models, ensuring that automated processes adhere to ETSI
standards and maintain service continuity throughout deploy-
ment and operation.
--- Seite 33 ---
33
F . Software Tools Enhancement
Standardization of software tools across the industry is es-
sential for consistency in network virtualization. A significant
challenge is to promote the adoption of common formalisms
and software tools. This includes developing ready-to-use
reliability templates and APIs that are tailored to specific
components like VNFs, VMs, and hypervisors. By standardiz-
ing these tools and enhancing their usability, practitioners can
more easily implement and assess reliability and availability,
leading to more robust and reliable virtualized networks.
G. Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence
Machine learning (ML) and Artificial Intelligence (AI)
offer promising opportunities for enhancing the reliability and
availability of virtualized networks. Future challenges involve
integrating ML and AI with formal reliability models, such
as Markov chains or fault trees, to enable risk assessment,
predictive maintenance, anomaly detection, and automated
fault recovery. Additionally, ensuring the interoperability of
ML/AI models with existing ETSI-standardized systems is
crucial. Successfully addressing these challenges will lead to
more intelligent, proactive management of network resources,
improving overall performance and reducing downtime.
H. Emerging Cloud and Network Virtualization Technologies
Virtualization technologies are constantly evolving, and this
evolution brings new challenges to the traditional techniques
for reliability and availability modeling. A current research
trend for example consists in leveraging non-standard com-
puting platform (accelerators, GPU, TPU, etc.) for NFV .
Similarly, deployment flexibility is increasing (from virtual
machines, to containers, from microservices to serverless and
function-as-a-service compute models), hence bringing more
pervasiveness and complexity to the interdependencies across
the elements of the virtualized systems. The impact of these
new technical direction on standaradization, formalisms and
software tools is open for investigation.
IX. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The work of Mario Di Mauro, Walter Cerroni, Fabio
Postiglione, and Massimo Tornatore was partially supported
by the European Union - Next Generation EU under the Italian
National Recovery and Resilience Plan (NRRP), Mission
4, Component 2, Investment 1.3, CUPs E83C22004640001,
D43C22003080001, and J33C22002880001, partnership on
“Telecommunications of the Future” (PE00000001 - program
“RESTART”).
REFERENCES
[1] T. Zhang, H. Qiu, L. Linguaglossa, W. Cerroni, and P. Giaccone. NFV
platforms: Taxonomy, design choices and future challenges. IEEE
Transactions on Network and Service Management , 18(1):30–48, 2021.
[2] F. Bari, S. R. Chowdhury, R. Ahmed, R. Boutaba, and O.C.M. Duarte.
Orchestrating virtualized network functions. IEEE Transactions on
Network and Service Management , 13(4):725–739, 2016.
[3] N. M. Mosharaf Kabir Chowdhury and R. Boutaba. Network virtual-
ization: state of the art and research challenges. IEEE Communications
Magazine , 47(7):20–26, 2009.[4] N. M. Mosharaf Kabir Chowdhury and R. Boutaba. A survey of
network virtualization. Computer Networks , 54(5):862–876, 2010.
[5] Intel Corporation. Reliability, Availability, and Insights - Reliability,
Availability, and Serviceability in Telecommunication Networks, 2023.
[6] K. S. Trivedi and A. Bobbio. Reliability and Availability Engineering
- Modeling, Analysis, and Applications . Cambridge University Press,
2017.
[7] A. Avizienis, J.-C. Laprie, B. Randell, and C. Landwehr. Basic concepts
and taxonomy of dependable and secure computing. IEEE Transactions
on Dependable and Secure Computing , 1(1):11–33, 2004.
[8] C. Colman-Meixner, C. Develder, M. Tornatore, and B. Mukherjee. A
survey on resiliency techniques in cloud computing infrastructures and
applications. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials , 18(3):2244–
2281, 2016.
[9] M. A. Mukwevho and T. Celik. Toward a smart cloud: A review
of fault-tolerance methods in cloud systems. IEEE Transactions on
Services Computing , 14(2):589–605, 2021.
[10] Z. Amiri, A. Heidari, N.J. Navimipour, and M. Unal. Resilient and
dependability management in distributed environments: a systematic
and comprehensive literature review. Cluster Computing , 26:1565–
1600, 2023.
[11] M. Nabi, M. Toeroe, and F. Khendek. Availability in the cloud: State
of the art. Journal of Network and Computer Applications , 60:54–67,
2016.
[12] S. Cherrared, S. Imadali, E. Fabre, G. Gössler, and I.G.B. Yahia. A
survey of fault management in network virtualization environments:
Challenges and solutions. IEEE Transactions on Network and Service
Management , 16(4):1537–1551, 2019.
[13] A. J. Gonzalez, G. Nencioni, A. Kamisi ´nski, B. E. Helvik, and P. E.
Heegaard. Dependability of the NFV orchestrator: State of the art
and research challenges. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials ,
20(4):3307–3329, 2018.
[14] R. Mijumbi, J. Serrat, J.L. Gorricho, N. Bouten, F. De Turck, and
R. Boutaba. Network function virtualization: State-of-the-art and
research challenges. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials ,
18(1):236–262, 2016.
[15] S. Azadiabad and F. Khendek. Dependability of network services in the
context of nfv: A taxonomy and state of the art classification. Journal
of Network and Systems Management , 32(37):1–33, 2024.
[16] P. C. Fonseca and E. S. Mota. A survey on fault management in
software-defined networks. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials ,
19(4):2284–2321, 2017.
[17] Y . Yu, X. Li, X. Leng, L. Song, K. Bu, Y . Chen, J. Yang, L. Zhang,
K. Cheng, and X. Xiao. Fault management in software-defined
networking: A survey. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials ,
21(1):349–392, 2019.
[18] V . G. Nguyen, A. Brunstrom, K. J. Grinnemo, and J. Taheri. SDN/NFV-
based mobile packet core network architectures: A survey. IEEE
Communications Surveys & Tutorials , 19(3):1567–1602, 2017.
[19] K. Kaur, V . Mangat, and K. Kumar. A comprehensive survey of service
function chain provisioning approaches in SDN and NFV architecture.
Computer Science Review , 38:100298, 2020.
[20] ETSI. Network Functions Virtualisation - An Introduction, Benefits,
Enablers, Challenges & Call for Action. Technical report, 2012.
[21] P. Rost, C. Mannweiler, D. S. Michalopoulos, C. Sartori, V . Sciancale-
pore, N. Sastry, O. Holland, S. Tayade, B. Han, D. Bega, D. Aziz,
and H. Bakker. Network slicing to enable scalability and flexibility in
5G mobile networks. IEEE Communications Magazine , 55(5):72–79,
2017.
[22] J. Ordonez-Lucena, P. Ameigeiras, D. Lopez, J. J. Ramos-Munoz,
J. Lorca, and J. Folgueira. Network slicing for 5G with SDN/NFV:
Concepts, architectures, and challenges. IEEE Communications Mag-
azine , 55(5):80–87, 2017.
[23] R. De Silva, Y . Siriwardhana, T. Samarasinghe, M. Liyanage, and
M. Ylianttila. Deployment options of 5G network slicing for smart
healthcare. In 2022 IEEE 19th Annual Consumer Communications &
Networking Conference (CCNC) , pages 749–750, 2022.
[24] E. Kapassa, M. Touloupou, A. Mavrogiorgou, A. Kiourtis, D. Gian-
nouli, K. Katsigianni, and D. Kyriazis. An innovative ehealth system
powered by 5G network slicing. In 2019 Sixth International Conference
on Internet of Things: Systems, Management and Security (IOTSMS) ,
pages 7–12, 2019.
[25] X. Zhao. Application of 5G end-to-end network slicing in trans-
portation field. In 2023 IEEE International Symposium on Broadband
Multimedia Systems and Broadcasting (BMSB) , pages 1–5, 2023.
[26] H. Kukkalli, S. Maheshwari, I. Seskar, and M. Skorupski. Evaluation
of multi-operator dynamic 5G network slicing for vehicular emergency
--- Seite 34 ---
34
scenarios. In 2020 IFIP Networking Conference (Networking) , pages
761–766, 2020.
[27] B. Rusti, H. Stefanescu, M. Iordache, J. Ghenta, C. Brezeanu, and
C. Patachia. Deploying smart city components for 5G network slicing.
In2019 European Conference on Networks and Communications
(EuCNC) , pages 149–154, 2019.
[28] L. Jialin, X. Yao, Y . Kangping, Z. Ziqi, and Z. Xinhui. Research
on resource allocation algorithm of smart grid based on 5G network
slicing technology. In 2022 IEEE 4th International Conference on
Power, Intelligent Computing and Systems (ICPICS) , pages 773–779,
2022.
[29] D. Borsatti, C. Grasselli, C. Contoli, L. Micciullo, L. Spinacci, M. Set-
tembre, W. Cerroni, and F. Callegati. Mission critical communications
support with 5G and network slicing. IEEE Transactions on Network
and Service Management , 20(1):595–607, 2023.
[30] D. Borsatti, C. Grasselli, L. Spinacci, M. Settembre, W. Cerroni, and
F. Callegati. Network slicing for mission critical communications. In
2020 16th International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Comput-
ing, Networking and Communications (WiMob) , pages 1–6, 2020.
[31] S. S. Johari, S. Taeb, N. Shahriar, S. R. Chowdhury, M. Tornatore,
R. Boutaba, J. Mitra, and M. Hemmati. DRL-assisted reoptimization
of network slice embedding on EON-enabled transport networks. IEEE
Transactions on Network and Service Management , 20(1):800–814,
2023.
[32] H. Yu, F. Musumeci, J. Zhang, M. Tornatore, and Y . Ji. Isolation-
aware 5G RAN slice mapping over WDM metro-aggregation networks.
Journal of Lightwave Technology , 38(6):1125–1137, 2020.
[33] ETSI. GR NFV-REL 010 v3.1.1 - Network Functions Virtualisation
(NFV) Release 3; Reliability; Report on NFV Resiliency for the
Support of Network Slicing, 2019.
[34] 5G Americas White Paper. Commercializing 5G network slicing, 2022.
[35] GSMA. E2E Network Slicing Architecture - v2.0, 2022.
[36] IETF. RFC 7665 - Service Function Chaining (SFC) Architecture,
2015.
[37] N. Feamster, J. Rexford, and E. Zegura. The road to SDN: an
intellectual history of programmable networks. ACM SIGCOMM
Computer Communication Review , 44(2):87–98, 2014.
[38] N. McKeown, T. Anderson, H. Balakrishnan, G. Parulkar, L. Peterson,
J. Rexford, S. Shenker, and J. Turner. Openflow: enabling innovation in
campus networks. ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review ,
38(2):69–74, 2008.
[39] ETSI. ETSI GS NFV-EVE 005 V1.1.1 - Network Functions Virtualisa-
tion (NFV); Ecosystem; Report on SDN Usage in NFV Architectural
Framework, 2015.
[40] ETSI. GS NFV-REL 001 - v1.1.1 Network Functions Virtualisation
(NFV); Resiliency Requirements, 2015.
[41] ITU-T. Cloud computing – End-to-end fault and performance manage-
ment framework of network services in inter-cloud, 2021.
[42] ETSI. GS NFV-REL 002 - Network Functions Virtualisation (NFV);
Reliability; Report on Scalable Architectures for Reliability Manage-
ment, 2015.
[43] ETSI. GS NFV-REL 003 - Network Functions Virtualisation (NFV);
Reliability; Report on Models and Features for End-to-End Reliability,
2016.
[44] ETSI. GS NFV-REL 004 - Network Functions Virtualisation (NFV);
Assurance; Report on Active Monitoring and Failure Detection, 2016.
[45] ETSI. GS NFV-REL 006 v3.1.1 - Network Functions Virtualisation
(NFV) Release 3; Reliability; Maintaining Service Availability and
Continuity Upon Software Modification, 2018.
[46] ETSI. GR NFV-REL 007 - Network Function Virtualisation (NFV);
Reliability; Report on the resilience of NFV-MANO critical capabili-
ties, 2017.
[47] ETSI. GR NFV-REL 014 v5.1.1 - Network Functions Virtualisation
(NFV) Release 5; Reliability; Report on evaluating reliability for cloud-
native VNFs, 2023.
[48] W. Ahmed, O. Hasan, and S. Tahar. Formalization of reliability block
diagrams in higher-order logic. Journal of Applied Logic , 18:19–41,
2016.
[49] G. L. Santos, T. Lynn, J. Kelner, and P. T. Endo. Availability-aware and
energy-aware dynamic SFC placement using reinforcement learning.
The Journal of Supercomputing , 77(11):12711–12740, 2021.
[50] B. Jansen, H. V . Ramasamy, Matthias Schunter, and A. Tanner. Ar-
chitecting Dependable and Secure Systems Using Virtualization , pages
124–149. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2008.
[51] M. Wang, B. Cheng, S. Zhao, B. Li, W. Feng, and J. Chen. Availability-
aware service chain composition and mapping in NFV-enabled net-works. In 2019 IEEE International Conference on Web Services
(ICWS) , pages 107–115, 2019.
[52] H. Chantre and N. L. S. da Fonseca. Reliable broadcasting in 5G
NFV-Based networks. IEEE Communications Magazine , 56(3):218–
224, 2018.
[53] W. Ding, H. Yu, and S. Luo. Enhancing the reliability of services
in NFV with the cost-efficient redundancy scheme. In 2017 IEEE
International Conference on Communications (ICC) , pages 1–6, 2017.
[54] J. Li, D. Guo, J. Xie, and S. Chen. Availability-aware provision of
service function chains in mobile edge computing. ACM Transactions
on Sensor Networks , 19(3):28, 2023.
[55] J. Fan, C. Guan, Y . Zhao, and C. Qiao. Availability-aware mapping of
service function chains. In IEEE INFOCOM 2017 - IEEE Conference
on Computer Communications , pages 1–9, 2017.
[56] M. Wang, B. Cheng, S. Wang, and J. Chen. Availability- and traffic-
aware placement of parallelized SFC in data center networks. IEEE
Transactions on Network and Service Management , 18(1):182–194,
2021.
[57] R. Souza, M. Santos, and S. Fernandes. Importance measures for NFV
data center: An availability evaluation. In Anais do V Workshop Pré-
IETF , 2018.
[58] M. Di Mauro, G. Galatro, M. Longo, F. Postiglione, and M. Tambasco.
Availability evaluation of a virtualized IP Multimedia Subsystem for
5G network architectures. In M. Cepin and R. Bris, editors, Safety
and Reliability - Theory and Applications , pages 2203–2210. Taylor &
Francis Group, 2017.
[59] Q. Li and R. Li. Reliability evaluation for cloud computing system
considering common cause failure. In 2016 35th Chinese Control
Conference (CCC) , pages 5267–5271, 2016.
[60] A. Butoi, A. Stan, and G. C. Silaghi. Reliable management of virtual-
ized resources using fault trees. In 2014 16th International Symposium
on Symbolic and Numeric Algorithms for Scientific Computing , pages
309–316, 2014.
[61] W. Dai, L. Riliskis, P. Wang, V . Vyatkin, and X. Guan. A cloud-
based decision support system for self-healing in distributed automation
systems using fault tree analysis. IEEE Transactions on Industrial
Informatics , 14(3):989–1000, 2018.
[62] H. Zhu, J. Li, J. Hu, and W. Li. Failure-aware and automated disaster
backup in the 5G core network. In 2022 International Communication
Engineering and Cloud Computing Conference (CECCC) , pages 48–
53, 2022.
[63] G.J.L. Paulraj, I. J. Jebadurai, and J. Jebadurai. Fault tree analysis
based virtual machine migration for fault-tolerant cloud data center.
Journal of Integrated Design and Process Science , 23(3):73–89, 2018.
[64] A. Butoi, A. Stan, and G. C. Silaghi. Autonomous management of
virtual machine failures in IaaS using fault tree analysis. In Jörn
Altmann, Kurt Vanmechelen, and Omer F. Rana, editors, Economics
of Grids, Clouds, Systems, and Services , pages 206–221, Cham, 2014.
Springer International Publishing.
[65] G.J.L. Paulraj, S. J. Francis, J. Dinest Peter, and I.J.R. Jebadurai. Fault-
tolerant cloud system based on fault tree analysis. In J. Dinesh Peter,
Amir H. Alavi, and Bahman Javadi, editors, Advances in Big Data and
Cloud Computing , pages 1–9, Singapore, 2019. Springer Singapore.
[66] D. Mani and A. Mahendran. An approach to evaluate the availability
of system in cloud computing using fault tree technique. International
Journal of Intelligent Engineering and Systems , 10(4):245 – 255, 2017.
[67] G. Bolch, S. Greiner, H. de Meer, and K. S. Trivedi. Queueing
networks and Markov chains: modeling and performance evaluation
with computer science applications . Wiley-Interscience, 1998.
[68] D. S. Kim, F. Machida, and K. S. Trivedi. Availability modeling
and analysis of a virtualized system. In 2009 15th IEEE Pacific Rim
International Symposium on Dependable Computing , pages 365–371,
2009.
[69] H. Farooq, M.S. Parwez, and A. Imran. Continuous time Markov chain
based reliability analysis for future cellular networks. In 2015 IEEE
Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM) , pages 1–6, 2015.
[70] M. Escheikh and K. Barkaoui. Scalable load balancing scheme for
distributed controllers in software defined data centers. In 2019 Sixth
International Conference on Software Defined Systems (SDS) , pages
47–54, 2019.
[71] T. Thein, S. Min Lee, S.D. Chi, and J. S. Park. Survival of the internet
applications: Proactive recovery model with virtualization. In 2008
IEEE International Symposium on Consumer Electronics , pages 1–4,
2008.
[72] T. Thein and J. S. Park. Availability modeling and analysis on
virtualized clustering with rejuvenation. International Journal of
Computer Science and Network Security , 8(9):72–80, 2008.
--- Seite 35 ---
35
[73] T. Thein, S. Min Lee, and J. S. Park. Availability analysis of application
servers using software rejuvenation and virtualization. Journal of
Computer Science and Technology , 24(2):339–346, 2009.
[74] B. Song, M. Paolieri, and L. Golubchik. Performance and revenue
analysis of hybrid cloud federations with QoS requirements. In 2022
IEEE 15th International Conference on Cloud Computing (CLOUD) ,
pages 321–330, 2022.
[75] K. Liu, G. Guo, Y . Wang, and X. Chen. Timely reliability analysis of
virtual machines considering migration and recovery in an edge server.
Sensors , 21(1), 2021.
[76] X. Changa, Z. Zhang, X. Li, and K. S. Trivedi. Model-based
survivability analysis of a virtualized system. In 2016 IEEE 41st
Conference on Local Computer Networks (LCN) , pages 611–614, 2016.
[77] Z. Hong, M. Shi, and Y . Wang. CTMC-based availability analysis of
multiple cluster systems with common mode failure. In 2016 4th Intl
Conf on Applied Computing and Information Technology/3rd Intl Conf
on Computational Science/Intelligence and Applied Informatics/1st Intl
Conf on Big Data, Cloud Computing, Data Science & Engineering
(ACIT-CSII-BCD) , pages 394–396, 2016.
[78] N. Wakuda, K. Nozomi, R. Shiraki, and E. Oki. Analytical model for
assessing unavailability in middleboxes with multiple backup servers
under shared protection. In 2024 20th International Conference on
the Design of Reliable Communication Networks (DRCN) , pages 1–8,
2024.
[79] K. Nozomi and E. Oki. Unavailability-aware allocation of backup
resources considering failures of virtual and physical machines. Com-
puter Networks , 239:110141, 2024.
[80] A. Reibman, R. Smith, and K. Trivedi. Markov and Markov reward
model transient analysis: An overview of numerical approaches. Eu-
ropean Journal of Operational Research , 40(2):257–267, 1989.
[81] R.H. Howard. Dynamic Probabilistic Systems, Vol II: Semi-Markov
and Decision Processes . John Wiley and Sons, 1971.
[82] Y . Kirsal, Y . Kirsal Ever, L. Mostarda, and O. Gemikonakli. Analytical
modelling and performability analysis for cloud computing using
queuing system. In 2015 IEEE/ACM 8th International Conference on
Utility and Cloud Computing (UCC) , pages 643–647, 2015.
[83] R. de S. Matos, P. R. M. Maciel, F. Machida, D. S. Kim, and K. S.
Trivedi. Sensitivity analysis of server virtualized system availability.
IEEE Transactions on Reliability , 61(4):994–1006, 2012.
[84] P. Sun, D. Wu, X. Qiu, L. Luo, and H. Li. Performance analysis
of cloud service considering reliability. In 2016 IEEE International
Conference on Software Quality, Reliability and Security Companion
(QRS-C) , pages 339–343, 2016.
[85] T. Hossfeld, P. E. Heegaard, M. Varela, and M. Jarschel. User-centric
Markov reward model on the example of cloud gaming. In 34th
International Teletraffic Congress (ITC 34), Shenzhen, China , pages
1–9, 2022.
[86] T. Hossfeld, P. E. Heegaard, M. Varela, and M. Jarschel. User-
centric markov reward model for state-dependent erlang loss systems.
Performance Evaluation , 165:102425, 2024.
[87] Sana Y . and Maroua I. Formal dependability analysis of fault tolerant
virtual machine allocation strategies in cloud radio access network.
Journal of Network and Computer Applications , 229:103917, 2024.
[88] A. Lisniaski, I. Frenkel, and Y . Ding. Multi-state System Reliability
Analysis and Optimization for Engineers and Industrial Managers .
Springer-Verlag London, 2010.
[89] A. Lisnianski and L. Teper. Dynamic Multi-state System Performability
Concepts, Measures, Lz-Transform Evaluation Method , pages 133–160.
Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2021.
[90] Y . Mo and L. Xing. Efficient analysis of resource availability for cloud
computing systems to reduce SLA violations. IEEE Transactions on
Dependable and Secure Computing , 19(6):3699–3710, 2022.
[91] Y . Mo, L. Cui, L. Xing, and Z. Zhang. Performability analysis of large-
scale multi-state computing systems. IEEE Transactions on Computers ,
67(1):59–72, 2018.
[92] G. Levitin. The Universal Generating Function in Reliability Analysis
and Optimization . Springer Series in Reliability Engineering. Springer,
2005.
[93] I. A. Ushakov. Optimal standby problems and a universal generating
function. Soviet Journal of Computer and System Science , 25(4):79–82,
1987.
[94] M. Di Mauro, M. Longo, and F. Postiglione. Availability evaluation of
multi-tenant service function chaining infrastructures by multidimen-
sional universal generating function. IEEE Transactions on Services
Computing , 14(5):1320–1332, 2018.
[95] L. De Simone, M. Di Mauro, M. Longo, R. Natella, and F. Postiglione.
Performability assessment of containerized multi-tenant IMS throughmultidimensional UGF. In 2022 18th International Conference on
Network and Service Management (CNSM) , pages 145–153, 2022.
[96] L. De Simone, M. Di Mauro, M. Longo, R. Natella, and F. Postiglione.
Multi-Provider IMS infrastructure with controlled redundancy: A per-
formability evaluation. IEEE Transactions on Network and Service
Management , 20(4):3984–3998, 2023.
[97] L. De Simone, M. Di Mauro, R. Natella, and F. Postiglione. A latency-
driven availability assessment for multi-tenant service chains. IEEE
Transactions on Services Computing , 16(2):815–829, 2022.
[98] M. Di Mauro, M. Longo, and F. Postiglione. Performability evaluation
of software defined networking infrastructures. In 10th EAI Inter-
national Conference on Performance Evaluation Methodologies and
Tools , pages 88–95, 2016.
[99] M. Di Mauro, M. Longo, and F. Postiglione. Reliability analysis of
the controller architecture in software defined networks. In Proc. of
Safety and Reliability of Complex Engineered Systems , pages 1503–
1510, 2015.
[100] E. Arakawa and E. Oki. Availability-aware virtual network function
placement based on multidimensional universal generating functions.
International Journal of Network Management , 34(2):28, 2023.
[101] G. L. Santos, P. Endo, T. Lynn, D. Sadok, and J. Kelner. Automating
the service function chain availability assessment. In 2021 IEEE
Symposium on Computers and Communications (ISCC) , pages 1–7,
2021.
[102] R. Schoenen and H. Yanikomeroglu. Resource pooling in network
virtualization and heterogeneous scenarios using stochastic Petri nets.
In2014 IEEE Global Communications Conference , pages 1193–1198,
2014.
[103] L. Zabala, R. Solozabal, A. Ferro, and B. Blanco. Model of a virtual
firewall based on stochastic Petri nets. In 2018 IEEE 17th International
Symposium on Network Computing and Applications (NCA) , pages 1–
4, 2018.
[104] D. Carvalho, L. Rodrigues, P. Takako Endo, S. Kosta, and F. A. Silva.
Mobile edge computing performance evaluation using stochastic Petri
nets. In 2020 IEEE Symposium on Computers and Communications
(ISCC) , pages 1–6, 2020.
[105] F. A. Silva, M. Rodrigues, P. Maciel, S. Kosta, and A. Mei. Planning
mobile cloud infrastructures using stochastic Petri nets and graphic
processing units. In 2015 IEEE 7th International Conference on Cloud
Computing Technology and Science (CloudCom) , pages 471–474, 2015.
[106] M. Jammal, A. Kanso, P. Heidari, and A. Shami. Availability analysis
of cloud deployed applications. In 2016 IEEE International Conference
on Cloud Engineering (IC2E) , pages 234–235, 2016.
[107] J. Mendonça, R. Lima, R. Matos, J. Ferreira, and E. Andrade. Availabil-
ity analysis of a disaster recovery solution through stochastic models
and fault injection experiments. In 2018 IEEE 32nd International
Conference on Advanced Information Networking and Applications
(AINA) , pages 135–142.
[108] A. Ghosh and J. Lakshmi. End-to-end resiliency analysis framework
for cloud storage services. In 2023 IEEE 28th Pacific Rim International
Symposium on Dependable Computing (PRDC) , pages 134–141, 2023.
[109] B. Silva, P. Maciel, and A. Zimmermann. Performability models for
designing disaster tolerant infrastructure-as-a-service cloud computing
systems. In 8th International Conference for Internet Technology and
Secured Transactions (ICITST-2013) , pages 647–652, 2013.
[110] J. Brilhante, B. Silva, P. Maciel, and A. Zimmermann. Dependability
models for Eucalyptus infrastructure clouds considering VM life-
cycle. In 2014 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and
Cybernetics (SMC) , pages 1336–1341, 2014.
[111] C. Brito, L. Rodrigues, B. Santos, I. Fé, T.A. Nguyen, D. Min,
J.W.o Lee, and F.A. Silva. Stochastic model driven performance and
availability planning for a mobile edge computing system. Applied
Sciences , 11(9), 2021.
[112] L. Rui, X. Chen, Z. Gao, W. Li, X. Qiu, and L. Meng. Petri net-
based reliability assessment and migration optimization strategy of sfc.
IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management , 18(1):167–
181, 2021.
[113] M. Jammal, A. Kanso, P. Heidari, and A. Shami. Evaluating high
availability-aware deployments using Stochastic Petri Net model and
cloud scoring selection tool. IEEE Transactions on Services Comput-
ing, 14(1):141–154, 2021.
[114] M. Rizwan Ali, F. Ahmad, M. Hasanain Chaudary, Z. Ashfaq Khan,
M.A. Alqahtani, J. Saad Alqurni, Z. Ullah, and W.U. Khan. Petri net
based modeling and analysis for improved resource utilization in cloud
computing. Peer J Computer Science , 7, 2021.
[115] H. Dong, Z. Liu, H. Li, and X. Wang. Evaluating the availability
of service function chain under different elasticity strategies based on
--- Seite 36 ---
36
colored petri net. In 23rd IEEE International Conference on Software
Quality, Reliability, and Security, QRS 2023, Chiang Mai, Thailand,
October 22-26, 2023 , pages 751–760, 2023.
[116] R. Li, B. Decocq, A. Barros, Y . Fang, and Z. Zeng. Petri net-based
model for 5g and beyond networks resilience evaluation. In 2022 25th
Conference on Innovation in Clouds, Internet and Networks (ICIN) ,
pages 131–135, 2022.
[117] M. Ajmone Marsan, G. Conte, and G. Balbo. A class of generalized
stochastic Petri nets for the performance evaluation of multiprocessor
systems. ACM Transactions on Computer Systems , 2(2):93–122, 1984.
[118] J. Zhu, N. Huang, J. Wang, and X. Qin. Availability model for data
center networks with dynamic migration and multiple traffic flows.
IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management , 20(3):2975–
2989, 2023.
[119] M. Rodrigues, B. Vasconcelos, C. Gomes, and E. Tavares. Evaluation
of NoSQL DBMS in private cloud environment: An approach based on
stochastic modeling. In 2019 IEEE International Systems Conference
(SysCon) , pages 1–7, 2019.
[120] L. M. Almutairi and S. Shetty. Generalized Stochastic Petri Net
model based security risk assessment of software defined networks.
InMILCOM 2017 - 2017 IEEE Military Communications Conference
(MILCOM) , pages 545–550, 2017.
[121] Y . Liu, X. Li, Y . Lin, R. Kang, and L. Xiao. A colored generalized
stochastic Petri net simulation model for service reliability evaluation
of active-active cloud data center based on IT infrastructure. In 2017
2nd International Conference on System Reliability and Safety (ICSRS) ,
pages 51–56, 2017.
[122] W. H. Sanders and J. F. Meyer. Stochastic Activity Networks: Formal
Definitions and Concepts , pages 315–343. Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
Berlin, Heidelberg, 2001.
[123] M. Di Mauro, G. Galatro, M. Longo, F. Postiglione, and M. Tambasco.
IP Multimedia Subsystem in a containerized environment: availability
and sensitivity evaluation. In 2019 IEEE Conference on Network
Softwarization (NetSoft) , pages 42–47, 2019.
[124] P. Vizarreta, P. Heegaard, B. Helvik, W. Kellerer, and C. M. Machuca.
Characterization of failure dynamics in SDN controllers. In 2017 9th
International Workshop on Resilient Networks Design and Modeling
(RNDM) , pages 1–7, 2017.
[125] B. Tola and Y . Jiang. Modeling and provisioning highly available NFV
services. In 2022 IEEE Conference on Network Function Virtualization
and Software Defined Networks (NFV-SDN) , pages 117–123, 2022.
[126] B. Tola, Y . Jiang, and B. E. Helvik. Model-driven availability
assessment of the NFV-MANO with software rejuvenation. IEEE
Transactions on Network and Service Management , 18(3):2460–2477,
2021.
[127] B. Tola, G. Nencioni, and B. E Helvik. Network-aware availability
modeling of an end-to-end NFV-enabled service. IEEE Transactions
on Network and Service Management , 16(4):1389–1403, 2019.
[128] R. Entezari-Maleki, L. Sousa, and A. Movaghar. Performance and
power modeling and evaluation of virtualized servers in IaaS clouds.
Information Sciences , 394-395:106–122, 2017.
[129] A. Gonzalez, P. Gronsund, K. Mahmood, B. Helvik, P. Heegaard,
and G. Nencioni. Service availability in the NFV virtualized evolved
packet core. In 2015 IEEE Global Communications Conference
(GLOBECOM) , pages 1–6, 2015.
[130] Mohammad Roohitavaf, Reza Entezari-Maleki, and Ali Movaghar.
Availability modeling and evaluation of cloud virtual data centers. In
2013 International Conference on Parallel and Distributed Systems ,
pages 675–680, 2013.
[131] T. Pathirana and G. Nencioni. Availability Model of a 5G-MEC System
. In32nd International Conference on Computer Communications and
Networks (ICCCN) , pages 1–10, 2023.
[132] E. Ataie, R. Entezari-Maleki, S. Ehsan Etesami, B. Egger, L. Sousa, and
A. Movaghar. Modeling and evaluation of dispatching policies in IaaS
cloud data centers using SANs. Sustainable Computing: Informatics
and Systems , 33:100617, 2022.
[133] B. Tola, G. Nencioni, B. E. Helvik, and Y . Jiang. Modeling and
evaluating NFV-enabled network services under different availability
modes. In 2019 15th International Conference on the Design of
Reliable Communication Networks (DRCN) , pages 1–5, 2019.
[134] G. Ciardo, A. Blakemore, P. F. Chimento, J. K. Muppala, and K. S.
Trivedi. Automated generation and analysis of Markov reward models
using stochastic reward nets. In C. D. Meyer and R. J. Plemmons,
editors, Linear Algebra, Markov Chains, and Queueing Models , pages
145–191, New York, NY , 1993. Springer New York.
[135] J. K. Muppala, G. Ciardo, and K. S Trivedi. Stochastic reward nets
for reliability prediction. 1996.[136] A.M.M. Paing. Analysis of availability model based on software aging
in SDN controllers with rejuvenation. In 2020 IEEE Conference on
Computer Applications(ICCA) , pages 1–7, 2020.
[137] K. Han, T.A. Nguyen, and E. Mi Choi. An evaluation of availability,
reliability and power consumption for a SDN infrastructure using
Stochastic Reward Net. In Advances in Computer Science and
Ubiquitous Computing , pages 637–648, 2016.
[138] T. A. Nguyen, K. Han, D. Min, E. Choi, T. D. Thang, and Y . Choi. A
stochastic reward net-based assessment of reliability, availability and
operational cost for a software-defined network infrastructure. The
Journal of Supercomputing , 75(8):4657–4683, 2019.
[139] F. Longo, R. Ghosh, V . K. Naik, and K. S. Trivedi. A scalable availabil-
ity model for infrastructure-as-a-service cloud. In 2011 IEEE/IFIP 41st
International Conference on Dependable Systems & Networks (DSN) ,
pages 335–346, 2011.
[140] R. Ghosh, F. Longo, F. Frattini, S. Russo, and K. S. Trivedi. Scalable
analytics for IaaS cloud availability. IEEE Transactions on Cloud
Computing , 2(1):57–70, 2014.
[141] E. Ataie, R. Entezari-Maleki, L. Rashidi, K. S. Trivedi, D. Ardagna,
and A. Movaghar. Hierarchical stochastic models for performance,
availability, and power consumption analysis of IaaS clouds. IEEE
Transactions on Cloud Computing , 7(4):1039–1056, 2019.
[142] B. Liu, X. Chang, Z. Han, K.S. Trivedi, and R. J. Rodríguez. Model-
based sensitivity analysis of IaaS cloud availability. Future Generation
Computer Systems , 83:1–13, 2018.
[143] R. Entezari-Maleki, K. S. Trivedi, and A. Movaghar. Performability
evaluation of grid environments using stochastic reward nets. IEEE
Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing , 12(2):204–216,
2015.
[144] Y . Liu, K. Wang, L. Ge, L. Ye, and J. Cheng. Adaptive evaluation of
virtual machine placement and migration scheduling algorithms using
stochastic Petri nets. IEEE Access , 7:79810–79824, 2019.
[145] F. Machida, D. S. Kim, and K. S. Trivedi. Modeling and analysis of
software rejuvenation in a server virtualized system. In 2010 IEEE
Second International Workshop on Software Aging and Rejuvenation ,
pages 1–6, 2010.
[146] R. Shojaee, A. Latifi, and N. Yazdani. A stochastic reward net approach
to model availability of cloud virtualization. In 7th International
Symposium on Telecommunications (IST2014) , pages 683–688, 2014.
[147] T.A. Nguyen, D.S. Kim, and J.S. Park. Availability modeling and
analysis of a data center for disaster tolerance. Future Generation
Computer Systems , 56:27–50, 2016.
[148] Y . Cao, L. Zhao, R. Zhang, Y . Yang, X. Zhou, and K. Li. Experience-
availability analysis of online cloud services using stochastic models. In
2018 IFIP Networking Conference (IFIP Networking) and Workshops ,
pages 1–9, 2018.
[149] M. Torquato and M. Vieira. Interacting SRN models for availability
evaluation of VM migration as rejuvenation on a system under vary-
ing workload. In 2018 IEEE International Symposium on Software
Reliability Engineering Workshops (ISSREW) , pages 300–307, 2018.
[150] M. Torquato, P. Maciel, and M. Vieira. Security and availability
modeling of VM migration as moving target defense. In 2020 IEEE
25th Pacific Rim International Symposium on Dependable Computing
(PRDC) , pages 50–59, 2020.
[151] M. Di Mauro, M. Longo, F. Postiglione, G. Carullo, and M. Tambasco.
Software defined storage: Availability modeling and sensitivity anal-
ysis. In 2017 International Symposium on Performance Evaluation
of Computer and Telecommunication Systems (SPECTS) , pages 1–7,
2017.
[152] T.A. Nguyen, D.S. Kim, and J.S. Park. A comprehensive availability
modeling and analysis of a virtualized servers system using stochastic
reward nets. Future Generation Computer Systems , 2014:165316, 2014.
[153] Q. Zhang, F. Machida, and E. Andrade. Performance bottleneck
analysis of drone computation offloading to a shared fog node. In 2022
IEEE International Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering
Workshops (ISSREW) , pages 216–221, 2022.
[154] D. Bruneo. A stochastic model to investigate data center performance
and QoS in IaaS cloud computing systems. IEEE Transactions on
Parallel and Distributed Systems , 25(3):560–569, 2014.
[155] M. Di Mauro, G. Galatro, M. Longo, F. Postiglione, and M. Tambasco.
A REST-based framework for performability management of service
function chains. In 2023 13th International Workshop on Resilient
Networks Design and Modeling (RNDM) , pages 1–6, 2023.
[156] M. Di Mauro, G. Galatro, M. Longo, F. Postiglione, and M. Tambasco.
Comparative performability assessment of SFCs: The case of container-
ized IP Multimedia Subsystem. IEEE Transactions on Network and
Service Management , 18(1):258–272, 2021.
--- Seite 37 ---
37
[157] F. Machida, E. Andrade, D. S. Kim, and K. S. Trivedi. Candy:
Component-based availability modeling framework for cloud service
management using SysML. In 2011 IEEE 30th International Sympo-
sium on Reliable Distributed Systems , pages 209–218, 2011.
[158] M. Di Mauro, G. Galatro, M. Longo, F. Postiglione, and M. Tambasco.
HASFC: A MANO-compliant framework for availability management
of service chains. IEEE Communications Magazine , 59(6):52–58, 2021.
[159] M. Di Mauro, G. Galatro, M. Longo, A. Palma, F. Postiglione, and
M. Tambasco. Automated generation of availability models for SFCs:
The case of virtualized IP Multimedia Subsystem. In NOMS 2020
- 2020 IEEE/IFIP Network Operations and Management Symposium ,
pages 1–6, 2020.
[160] M. Di Mauro, G. Galatro, M. Longo, A. Palma, F. Postiglione, and
M. Tambasco. A tool for automated generation of availability models
for service function chains. In Proceedings of the 29th European Safety
and Reliability Conference (ESREL) , pages 1–6, 2020.
[161] A. Bobbio, A. Puliafito, M. Telek, and K. S. Trivedi. Recent devel-
opments in non-Markovian stochastic Petri nets. Journal of Systems
Circuits and Computers , 8(1):119–158, 1998.
[162] R. German. Performance Analysis of Communication Systems: Mod-
eling with Non-Markovian Stochastic Petri Nets . John Wiley & sons,
2000.
[163] Y . Li, L. Li, J. Bai, X. Chang, Y . Yao, and P. Liu. Availability and
reliability of service function chain: A quantitative evaluation view.
International Journal of Computational Intelligence Systems , 16(1):1–
11, 2023.
[164] L. Liu, J. Bai, X. Chang, F. Machida, K.S. Trivedi, and H. Zhu.
Towards Semi-Markov model-based dependability evaluation of VM-
based multi-domain service function chain , 2023. https://arxiv.org/abs/
2308.12748.
[165] J. Bai, X. Chang, F. Machida, L. Jiang, Z. Han, and K. S. Trivedi.
Impact of service function aging on the dependability for MEC
service function chain. IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure
Computing , 20(4):2811–2824, 2023.
[166] J. Bai, X. Chang, F. Machida, Z. Han, Y . Xu, and K. S. Trivedi.
Quantitative understanding serial-parallel hybrid SFC services: a de-
pendability perspective. Peer-to-Peer Networking and Applications ,
15(4):1923–1938, 2022.
[167] J. Bai, X. Chang, F. Machida, K. S. Trivedi, and Y . Li. Model-Driven
dependability assessment of microservice chains in MEC-enabled IoT.
IEEE Transactions on Services Computing , 16(4):2769–2785, 2023.
[168] J. Bai, X. Chang, F. Machida, K. S. Trivedi, and Z. Han. Analyzing
software rejuvenation techniques in a virtualized system: Service
provider and user views. IEEE Access , 8:6448–6459, 2020.
[169] J. Bai, X. Chang, R. J. Rodríguez, K. S. Trivedi, and S. Li. Towards
UA V-based MEC service chain resilience evaluation: A quantitative
modeling approach. IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology ,
72(4):5181–5194, 2023.
[170] O. Ivanchenko, V . Kharchenko, B. Moroz, L. Kabak, and K. Smoktii.
Semi-Markov’s models for availability assessment of an infrastructure
as a service cloud with multiple pools of physical and virtual machines.
In2018 IEEE 9th International Conference on Dependable Systems,
Services and Technologies (DESSERT) , pages 98–102, 2018.
[171] O. Ivanchenko, V . Kharchenko, B. Moroz, Y . Ponochovnyi, and
L. Degtyareva. Availability assessment of a cloud server system:
Comparing Markov and semi-Markov models. In 2021 11th IEEE
International Conference on Intelligent Data Acquisition and Advanced
Computing Systems: Technology and Applications (IDAACS) , volume 2,
pages 1–6, 2021.
[172] T. M. Mengistu, D. Che, A. Alahmadi, and S. Lu. Semi-Markov process
based reliability and availability prediction for volunteer cloud systems.
In2018 IEEE 11th International Conference on Cloud Computing
(CLOUD) , pages 359–366, 2018.
[173] O. Ivanchenko, V . Kharchenko, B. Moroz, L. Kabak, and K. Smok-
tii. Semi-Markov availability model considering deliberate mali-
cious impacts on an infrastructure-as-a-service cloud. In 2018 14th
International Conference on Advanced Trends in Radioelecrtronics,
Telecommunications and Computer Engineering (TCSET) , pages 570–
573, 2018.
[174] V . Kharchenko, Y . Ponochovnyi, O. Ivanchenko, H. Fesenko, and
O. Illiashenko. Combining Markov and Semi-Markov modelling for
assessing availability and cybersecurity of cloud and iot systems.
Cryptography , 6(3), 2022.
[175] E. Cinlar. Introduction to Stochastic Processes . Prentice-Hall, 1975.
[176] V . G. Kulkarni. Modeling and Analysis of Stochastic Systems . Chapman
& Hall, 1995.[177] J. Bai, X. Chang, G. Ning, Z. Zhang, and K. S. Trivedi. Service
availability analysis in a virtualized system: A Markov regenerative
model approach. IEEE Transactions on Cloud Computing , 10(3):2118–
2130, 2022.
[178] G. Ning, J. Zhao, Y . Lou, J. Alonso, R. Matias, K. S. Trivedi, B. Yin,
and K. Cai. Optimization of two-granularity software rejuvenation
policy based on the Markov regenerative process. IEEE Transactions
on Reliability , 65(4):1630–1646, 2016.
[179] F. Machida, R. Xia, and K. S. Trivedi. Performability modeling for raid
storage systems by Markov regenerative process. IEEE Transactions
on Dependable and Secure Computing , 15(1):138–150, 2018.
[180] K. Yamamoto H. Okamura and T. Dohi. Transient analysis of soft-
ware rejuvenation policies in virtualized system: Phase-type expansion
approach. Quality Technology & Quantitative Management , 11(3):335–
351, 2014.
[181] D. Bruneo, S. Distefano, F. Longo, A. Puliafito, and M. Scarpa.
Workload-based software rejuvenation in cloud systems. IEEE Trans-
actions on Computers , 62(6):1072–1085, 2013.
[182] D. Mani and A. Mahendran. Availability modelling of fault tolerant
cloud computing system. International Journal of Intelligent Engineer-
ing and Systems , 10(1):154–165, 2017.
[183] W. E. Smith, K. S. Trivedi, L. A. Tomek, and J. Ackaret. Availability
analysis of blade server systems. IBM Systems Journal , 47(4):621–640,
2008.
[184] R. Jhawar and V . Piuri. Fault tolerance management in IaaS clouds.
In2012 IEEE First AESS European Conference on Satellite Telecom-
munications (ESTEL) , pages 1–6, 2012.
[185] R. Paharsingh and O. Das. An availability model of a virtual TMR
system with applications in cloud/cluster computing. In 2011 IEEE
13th International Symposium on High-Assurance Systems Engineer-
ing, pages 261–268, 2011.
[186] T.A. Nguyen, J.W. Lee, I. de Sousa Fé, and F. A. Silva. A hierarchical
model based survivability and resiliency evaluation of medical edge
networks. In 2022 IEEE Ninth International Conference on Commu-
nications and Electronics (ICCE) , pages 87–92, 2022.
[187] B. Silva, P. Maciel, E. Tavares, C. Araujo, G. Callou, E. Sousa, N. Rosa,
M. Marwah, R. Sharma, A. Shah, T. Christian, and J.P. Pires. Astro:
A tool for dependability evaluation of data center infrastructures. In
2010 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics ,
pages 783–790, 2010.
[188] G. Callou, P. Maciel, E. Tavares, E. Sousa, B. Silva, J. Figueiredo,
C. Araujo, F. S. Magnani, and F. Neves. Sustainability and dependabil-
ity evaluation on data center architectures. In 2011 IEEE International
Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics , pages 398–403, 2011.
[189] E. Sousa, F. Lins, E. Tavares, P. Cunha, and P. Maciel. A modeling
approach for cloud infrastructure planning considering dependability
and cost requirements. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and
Cybernetics: Systems , 45(4):549–558, 2015.
[190] E. Bezerra, G. Callou, G. Alves, J. Accioly, and H. Gustavo. Storage
services in private clouds: Analysis, performance and availability
modeling. In 2016 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man,
and Cybernetics (SMC) , pages 003288–003293, 2016.
[191] E. Bezerra, G. Callou, G. Alves, J. Accioly, and H. Gustavo. Per-
formance and availability evaluation of storage services in private
cloud. In 2016 11th Iberian Conference on Information Systems and
Technologies (CISTI) , pages 1–6, 2016.
[192] V . Lira, E. Tavares, M. Oliveira, E. Sousa, and B. Nogueira. Virtual
network mapping considering energy consumption and availability.
Computing , 101(8):937–967, 2019.
[193] M. Torquato, E. Guedes, P. Maciel, and M. Vieira. A hierarchical
model for virtualized data center availability evaluation. In 2019 15th
European Dependable Computing Conference (EDCC) , pages 103–
110, 2019.
[194] M. Di Mauro, G. Galatro, M. Longo, F. Postiglione, and M. Tambasco.
Availability analysis of IP Multimedia Subsystem in cloud environ-
ments. In 2019 4th International Conference on System Reliability
and Safety (ICSRS) , pages 111–115, 2019.
[195] M. Di Mauro, G. Galatro, F. Postiglione, and M. Tambasco. Performa-
bility of network service chains: Stochastic modeling and assessment
of softwarized IP Multimedia Subsystem. IEEE Transactions on
Dependable and Secure Computing , 19(5):3071–3086, 2022.
[196] M. Di Mauro, M. Longo, F. Postiglione, and M. Tambasco. Availability
modeling and evaluation of a network service deployed via NFV. In
A. Piva, I. Tinnirello, and S. Morosi, editors, Digital Communication.
Towards a Smart and Secure Future Internet , pages 31–44, Cham,
2017. Springer International Publishing.
--- Seite 38 ---
38
[197] L. De Simone, M. Di Mauro, R. Natella, and F. Postiglione. Perfor-
mance and availability challenges in designing resilient 5G architec-
tures. IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management , 2024.
[198] S. Sebastio, R. Ghosh, and T. Mukherjee. An availability analysis ap-
proach for deployment configurations of containers. IEEE Transactions
on Services Computing , 14(1):16–29, 2021.
[199] R. Melo, M.C. Bezerra, J. Dantas, R. Matos, I. Melo, and P. Maciel.
Video on demand hosted in private cloud: Availability modeling
and sensitivity analysis. In 2015 IEEE International Conference on
Dependable Systems and Networks Workshops , pages 12–18, 2015.
[200] R. Melo, M.C. Bezerra, J. Dantas, R. Matos, I. Melo, and P. Maciel.
Sensitivity analysis of availability of video streaming service in cloud
computing. In 2014 IEEE 33rd International Performance Computing
and Communications Conference (IPCCC) , pages 1–2, 2014.
[201] R. Melo, M.C. Bezerra, J. Dantas, R. Matos, I.M. Filho, and P. Maciel.
V oD in Eucalyptus platform: Availability modeling and sensibility
analysis. In 10th International Conference on Network and Service
Management (CNSM) and Workshop , pages 288–291, 2014.
[202] M.C. Bezerra, R. Melo, J. Dantas, P. Maciel, and F. Vieira. Availability
modeling and analysis of a V oD service for Eucalyptus platform. In
2014 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics
(SMC) , pages 3779–3784, 2014.
[203] T. A. Nguyen, D. Min, E. Choi, and T. D. Tran. Reliability and
availability evaluation for cloud data center networks using hierarchical
models. IEEE Access , 7:9273–9313, 2019.
[204] T. A. Nguyen, T. Eom, S. An, J. S. Park, J. B. Hong, and D. S. Kim.
Availability modeling and analysis for software defined networks. In
2015 IEEE 21st Pacific Rim International Symposium on Dependable
Computing (PRDC) , pages 159–168, 2015.
[205] J. Araujo, D. Oliveira, R. Matos, G. Alves, and P. Maciel. Availability
and reliability modeling of mobile cloud architectures. IEEE Transac-
tions on Industrial Informatics , pages 1–13, 2023.
[206] J. Dantas, R. Matos, J. Araujo, and P. Maciel. An availability
model for Eucalyptus platform: An analysis of warm-standy replication
mechanism. In 2012 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man,
and Cybernetics (SMC) , pages 1664–1669, 2012.
[207] R.A. Sahner and K.S. Trivedi. A software tool for learning about
stochastic models. IEEE Transactions on Education , 36(1):56–61,
1993.
[208] R. German, C. Kelling, A. Zimmermann, and G. Hommel. TimeNET:
a toolkit for evaluating non-Markovian Stochastic Petri Nets. Perfor-
mance Evaluation , 24(1):69–87, 1995.
[209] G. Ciardo, J. Muppala, and K. Trivedi. SPNP: Stochastic Petri Net
package. In Proceedings of the Third International Workshop on Petri
Nets and Performance Models, PNPM89 , pages 142–151, 1989.
[210] P. Maciel, R. Matos, B. Silva, J. Figueiredo, D. Oliveira, I. Fe,
R. Maciel, and J. Dantas. Mercury: Performance and dependability
evaluation of systems with exponential, expolynomial, and general
distributions. In 2017 IEEE 22nd Pacific Rim International Symposium
on Dependable Computing (PRDC) , pages 50–57, 2017.
[211] F. Longo, M. Scarpa, and A. Puliafito. WebSPN: A Flexible Tool
for the Analysis of Non-Markovian Stochastic Petri Nets. In Lance
Fiondella and Antonio Puliafito, editors, Principles of Performance
and Reliability Modeling and Evaluation , Springer Series in Reliability
Engineering, pages 255–285. Springer, October 2016.
[212] M.A. Marsan, S. Donatelli, and F. Neri. GSPN models of multiserver
multiqueue systems. In Proceedings of the Third International Work-
shop on Petri Nets and Performance Models, PNPM89 , pages 19–28,
1989.
[213] T. Courtney, S. Gaonkar, K. Keefe, E. W. D. Rozier, and W. H.
Sanders. Möbius 2.3: a an extensible tool for dependability, security,
and performance evaluation of large and complex system models. In
2009 IEEE/IFIP International Conference on Dependable Systems &
Networks , pages 353–358, 2009.
[214] E. Verbeek and D. Fahland. CPN IDE: An extensible replacement for
CPN tools that uses Access/CPN. In 3rd International Conference on
Process Mining Doctoral Consortium and Demo Track , pages 29–30,
2021.
[215] S. Kounev, S. Spinner, and P. Meier. QPME 2.0 - A Tool for Stochastic
Modeling and Analysis Using Queueing Petri Nets , pages 293–311.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2010.
[216] F. Bause, P. Buchholz, and P. Kemper. A toolbox for functional and
quantitative analysis of DEDS. In R. Puigjaner, N. N. Savino, and
B. Serra, editors, Computer Performance Evaluation , pages 356–359,
Berlin, Heidelberg, 1998. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.[217] C. Rohr, W. Marwan, and M. Heiner. Snoopy—a unifying Petri
net framework to investigate biomolecular networks. Bioinformatics ,
26(7):974–975, 2010.
[218] R.W. Butler. The SURE approach to reliability analysis. IEEE
Transactions on Reliability , 41(2):210–218, 1992.
[219] N. J. Dingle, W. J. Knottenbelt, and T. Suto. Pipe2: a tool for the per-
formance evaluation of generalised stochastic Petri nets. Performance
Evaluation Review , 36(4):34–39, 2009.
[220] M. Paolieri, M. Biagi, L. Carnevali, and E. Vicario. The ORIS tool:
Quantitative evaluation of Non-Markovian systems. IEEE Transactions
on Software Engineering , 47(6):1211–1225, 2021.